
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron Microscopy 
and Analysis 
Third edition 
Peter J. Goodhew 
University of liverpool. UK 
John Humphreys 
Manchester Materials Science Centre, UK 
Richard Beanland 
Marconi Materials Technology, Towcester. UK 
London and New York 
Also available as a printed book 
see title verso for ISBN details 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron Microscopy and Analysis 
zzzPsgiolePfrp
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron Microscopy 
and Analysis 
Third edition 
Peter J. Goodhew 
University of Liverpool. UK 
John Humphreys 
Manchester Materials Science Centre, UK 
Richard Beanland 
Marconi Materials Technology, Towcester, UK 
London and New York 
zzzPsgiolePfrpPublished 2001 by 
Taylor & Francis 
II New Fetter lane, London EC4P 4EE 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada 
by Taylor & Francis Inc 
29 West 35th Street. New York. NY 10001 
Thi. edition published in Ihe Taylor & Fmncis e-Library, 2001. 
Taylor & Franci. is on imprint afth~ Taylor & Francis Group 
© 2001 Peter J. Goodhew. John Humphreys and Richard Beanland 
First edition published 1975 by Wykeham Publications (London) Ltd 
Second edition published 1988 by Taylor & Francis 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic. 
mechanical. or mher means. now known or hereafter 
invented. induding photocopying and recording. or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publisher>. 
Every effort has been made to ensure that the advice and information in thi' book 
is true and accurate at the time of going to press. However, neither the 
publisher nor the author> can accept any legal respon.i bility or liability for 
any error> or omissions that may be made. In the case of drug 
administration. any medical procedure or the use oftechnical equipment 
mentioned within this book, you are strongly advised to consult the 
manufacturer's guidelines. 
Sritish library Cataloguing in Publication Dow 
A catalogue record for this book i. available 
from the British library 
library afCongre .. Cataloging in Publication Dow 
Goodhew, Peter J. 
Electron microscopy and analy.isJ Peter J. Goodhew.John Humphreys. Richard Beanland -3rd ed. 
p. cm 
Indudes bibliographical references (p.). 
I. Elettron microscopy. I. Humphreys, John II. Beanland. Richard. III. Title. 
QH212H G62 2000 
S02'.8'2S-dc21 
ISBN 07484 0968 8 (Prinl Edilion) 
ISBN 0·203·18425-4 Master c·book ISBN 
ISBN 0·203·18453-X (Glassbook Format) 
zzzPsgiolePfrpContents 
Acronyms 
Preface 
t Microseupy with light and electrulls 
I .1 Introduction I 
1.2 Mer{/OtI.~ of image formation 
1.3 Pixels 3 
1.4 The ligllt-oplicalmicroscope 
1.5 Magnification 7 
1.6 Rem/Illion 8 2 
4 
1.7 Dcpdl of field and depth ofJoC/ls 
1.8 Aberrations ill optical systems 14 
1.9 Electrons l'USlIS light 16 
1./0 Questions /9 12 
2 Electrons and their interaction with the specimen 
2.1 /Ilfrollucfioll 20 
2.2 Elecrrolls 20 
2.3 Gencrating a helml of electrons 24 
2.4 Deflection of electrons -magnetic lenses 27 
2.5 The scaTtering of electrons by atoms 29 
2.6 Elastic scaflering 30 
2.7 Inelastic scattering 31 
2.8 Secondary effects 34 
2.9 The jamily of electron microscopes 37 
2./0 Questions 38 . 
" . " 
1 
20 
zzzPsgiolePfrpVI Contents 
3 Eledrun diffraction 
3.1 The geometry of electron diffraction 41 
3.2 Diffraction spot patterns 47 
3.3 Use of tIle reciprocallaflice in diffraction analysis 51 
3.4 Otller types of diffraction pallern 58 
3.5 Questiom 64 
4 The transmission electron microscope 
4.1 TI,e instfllment 66 
4.2 COlllrast mechallism.~ 76 
4.3 High milage electron microscopy (HVEM) 108 
4.4 Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEAl) 110 
4.5 Preparation of specimens for TEM 110 
4.6 Questiom 121 
5 The scanning electron microscope 
5.1 How it works 122 
5.2 Obtaining a signal in tIle SEM 124 
5.3 TI,e optics of the SEAl 131 
5.4 TI,e performance of the SEAl 133 
5.5 TI,e ultimate resolution of tIle SEM 135 
5.6 Topograpllic images 141 
5.7 Compositional images 146 
5.8 Crystallographic information from the SEAl 149 
5.9 TI,e use of OIher signals in tIle SEM 153 
5.10 Image acquisition. processing (md storage 159 40 
66 
122 
5.11 TI,e preparation of specimem for examination in the SEAl 162 
5.12 LOll" mltage microscopy 164 
5.13 I:.ilvironmenwl scanning electron microscopy (ESEM) 166 
5.14 Questiom 167 
6 Chemical analysis in the electron microscope 
6.1 TI,e generation of X-rays lI"ithin a specimen 170 
6.2 Detection ami coulIling of X-rays 174 
6.3 X-ray analysis of bulk specimens 184 
6.4 X-ray analysis of tllin specimem in the TEM /93 
6.5 Qualllitati)" e analysis in an electron microscope 196 
6.6 Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) 205 
6.7 A brief comparison of techniques 212 
6.8 Questiom 213 169 
zzzPsgiolePfrp7 [Iectrun mintlscopy and tither techniques 
7.1 Comp/emelllary imaging techniques 214 
7.2 Comp/emelllar y analysis techniques -a/tematire 
mill/pis systems 225 
7.3 Comp/emelllary diffraction techniques 233 
7.4 SumllUlry 234 
7.5 Questions 234 
Further reading 
Answers 
1m/ex Contents vii 
214 
236 
238 243 
zzzPsgiolePfrp
zzzPsgiolePfrpAcronyms 
AEM 
AES 
AFM 
ALCHEMI 
APFIM 
CBED 
CBlM 
CTEM 
EBSD 
ECP 
EOX (or EOS) 
EPMA 
ESeA 
FEG 
FIB 
FIM 
HOLZ 
HREM 
HVEM 
LACBED 
LEED 
LEEM 
LIMA 
MFM 
MS 
PEELS 
POSAP 
RBS 
REM 
SACP 
SAD 
SAM Analytical electron microscopy 
Auger electron spectroscopy 
Atomic force microscopy 
Atom location by channelling enhanced microanalysis 
Atom probe field ion microscopy 
Convergent beam electron diffraction 
Convergent beam imaging 
Conventional TEM 
Electron back scattering diffraction 
Electron channelling pattern 
Energy dispersive X-ray analysis 
Electron probe microanalysis 
Electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (=XPS) 
Field emission gun 
Focused ion beam 
Field ion microscopy 
High order Laue zone 
High resolution electron microscopy 
High voltage electron microscopy 
Large angle convergent beam diffraction 
Low energy electron diffraction 
Low energy electron microscopy 
Laser ionization mass analysis 
Magnetic force microscopy 
Mass spectrometry 
Parallel electron energy loss spectrometry 
Position sensitive atom probe 
Rutherford backscattering 
Reflection electron microscopy 
Selected area channelling pattern 
Selected area diffraction 
Scanning Auger microscopy /Scanning acoustic microscopy 
zzzPsgiolePfrpx Acronyms 
SEM 
SIMS 
SPM 
STEM 
STM 
TEM 
TQFSIMS 
UPS 
WE OX 
WOX 
XPS 
ZAF Scanning electron microscopy 
Secondary ion mass spectrometry 
Scanning probe microscopy 
Scanning transmission electron microscopy 
Scanning tunnelling microscopy 
Transmission electron microscopy 
Time of flight SIMS 
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy 
Windowle ss EOX 
Wavelength dispersive X-ray spectrometry 
X-ray photocleetron spectrometry (= ESCA) 
Atomic number, absorption and fluorescence correction 
zzzPsgiolePfrpPreface 
It has been gratifying to discover in how many countries of the world the 
first two editions of this slim textbook have been rcad. It is now twelve years 
since the second edition was written in 1987 and this has been a period of 
rapid development in both electron microscopy itself and in related tech­
niques. Many of the mosl visible developm ents arc associated with the 
introduction of computer control into microscopy -it is now commonplace 
to find an SEM driven from a keyboard or mouse rather than from 
dedicated knobs on the instrument fascia. Other development s have only 
become feasible since the advent of cheap high power computing; confocal 
light microscopy and scanning probe microscopy arc both good examples . 
In writing this third edition we have been conscious that the basic prin­
ciples of SEM and TEM have not changed, whereas the outward appear­
ance of many microscopes has. During the 1980s scanned probe 
microscopies have also grown up. They are no longer specialized laboratory 
instruments but some of them (e.g. AFM) have become off-the-shelf 
everyday imaging tools. We have tried to reflect these changes without 
removing the material which leads to fundamental understanding of micros­
copy itself. 
The book now covers a wide range of topics and it is a pleasure to 
acknowledge the help of many colleagues who offered help in particular 
areas, especially Dr 1·lden Davock who provided several of the illustrations 
and Anne Bcckerlegge who imposed order on our chaos. 
Peter J. Goodhew , John Humphre ys and Richard Beanland 
Liverpool, Manchester and Towcester 
zzzPsgiolePfrp
zzzPsgiolePfrpChapter I 
M icroscopy with I ight and 
electrons 
1.1 Introduction 
A microscope is an optical system which transforms an 'object' into an 'image'. 
We arc usually interested in making the image much larger than the object, thaI 
is magnifying it, and there arc many ways in which this can be done. This book 
deals wilh several sophisticated Icchniq ues for magnifying images of very small 
objects by large amounts , but many of the principles involved arc just the same 
as those which have been developed for light microscopes over the past 400 
years. The concepts of resolution , magnification, depth of field and lens aberra­
tion arc very important in electron microscopy and so we deal with them in Ihis 
firsl chapter in the more familiar context of the light microscope. When wc 
considcr electron microscopes in later chapters it will be found that instead of 
becoming more complicated, many areas of the subject become simpler because 
we arc dealing with electrons rather than light. Thus although apparently more 
complex, and certainly much more expensive, electron microscopes arc almost 
as easy to understand (in principle) as their humble stable-mate , the magnifying 
glass. 
The techniques which arc given the most detailed coverage in this book arc 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) 
and the analytical techniques which are made available by using them. At the 
simplest level an SEM can be thought of as providing images of external 
morphology, rather similar in appearance to those formed by the eye, while 
a TEM probes the internal structure of solids and gives us access to micro­
structural or ultrastructural detail not familiar to the human eye. In both cases 
several different types of image can be formed. Consequently it is necessary to 
understand not only how such microscopes work, but also how to interpret the 
images which they produce. This is particularly true for the TEM, and 
accounts for the length of Chapter 4. 
It will become apparent that there is much more to both SEM and TEM 
than is implied by the preceding paragraph, since there is almost infinite scope 
for control of the imaging processes to reveal specific types of detail in a 
specimen. In addition, the potential for analysis of local regions of a 
zzzPsgiolePfrp2 Electron microscopy and analysis 
specimcn while it is bcing examined in an elcctron mIcroscope has been 
exploited very widely since the first edition of this book was published. 
Chapter 6 deals in some detail with several of the analytical methods such as 
X-ray and electron spectrometry, which are now standard facilities on a 
modern microscope. It is also easy to obtain structural as well as chemical 
information by using electron diffraction in either an SEM or a TEM and 
this topic is treated in Chapter 3. Altogcther the modern family of electron 
microscopes are extremely versatile tools for revealing the nature and 
behaviour of matter. 
Several of the concepts which are essential to the understanding of electron 
microscopy are common to any imaging system, and many of these ideas will 
have first been met in the context of the light microscope. In the remainder of 
this chapter we therefore deal with some general features of imaging systems 
and then introduce the ideas of magnification, resolution and lens aberrations 
as they apply to simple and familiar light-optical systems. 
1.2 Methods of image formation 
There arc three basic ways in which an image can be formed. Perhaps the 
simplest 10 imagine is the projection image. of which the commonest example 
is the formation of shadows when an objcct is placed in front of a point source 
of illumination, as shown in Figure 1.1. The second type of image is formed by 
conventional lens systems, as for example in Figure 1.2, and we shall call this 
an optical image. This is not a strictly accurate term, since optical simply means 
'involving light' and one of the key lessons of this book is that similar images 
can be formed using electrons or ions. We will try to use the terms 'electron­
optical" and 'ion-optical' where they are appropriate. 
Both projection and optical images are formed in parallel, that is all parts of 
the image are formcd essentially simultaneously. However the third type of 
image we need to consider is the scanning image, in which each point of the 
picture is presented serially. The best-known example of this type of image is a 
television picture, in which several thousand picture points are displayed con­
secutively, but the process is repeated with such a high frequency that the 
image appears to the eye in its entirety. 
Source Object Tmage 
Figure I. / The formation of a projection (or shadow) image. Each point in the object is 
projected directly at the equivalent point in the image. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpMicroscopy with light and electrons 3 
" , 
I"" 
f 
I I , 
" (a) 
, 
(h) 
, 
(e) 
Figure /.2 Ray diagrams illustrating the formation of an image by a single lens of focal length (. 
An animated version of this ray diagram can be found in MATTER: Introduction to 
Electron Microscopes. 
In later chapters we will devote a great deal of allention to one optical 
tcchnique, the TEM, and to onc scanning tcchnique, the SEM. We will also, 
for comparison, describe a projcction tcchniquc, the Field Ion Microscope 
(FIM). 
1.3 Pixels 
One of the most important ideas concerned with images arises from the 
scanning image as typified by television. A European TV image contains 
about 700 x 625 discrete points and it is fairly obvious that the smallest 
piece of information about the image is contained in one of these pictllre 
poillfs. They are generally ealled pixels, whieh is short for picture element. A 
single domestic TV picture therefore consists of more than 200000 pixels, each 
of which can be of a different intensity or colour. The smallest detail which can 
possibly be shown in the image is a single pixel in size, that is 1/625 of the 
screen height for a TV image. The idea of the pixel arose from consideration of 
scanned images but it turns out to be universally applicable to images howevcr 
zzzPsgiolePfrp4 Electron microscopy and analysis 
they are formed. This is particularly relevant when an image is to be stored by a 
computer, and again it must be broken down into the smallest necessary units 
of information. Domestic television is only just becoming a 'digital' medium 
and the signals arc currently sent in analogue form. However the images 
produced by electron microscopes are often stored in computer memory and 
need to be in a digital form, that is each pixel is coded so that its brightness is 
represented by a single number (usually between zero and 255). Such images 
arc often composed of a number of pixels which is a power of two, and 
common image sizes are 256 x 256 (= 28 x 28) pixels or \024 x 1024 
(=210 x 210) pixels. Large amounts of computer memory arc then needed to 
store such images. If 256 (=28) brightness levels (known as grey levels) are 
permitted , each pixel takes up 8 bits of memory and a complete \024 x 1024 
pixel image needs 1024 x 1024 x 8 bits, which for many computers is I 
megabyte (often abbreviated to I M B). Such an image will just fit on the 
conventional floppy disc of a microcomputer. However, image compression 
techniques are making it possible 10 reduce the storage requirement. often by 
an order of magnitude. 
1.4 The light-optical microscop e 
Both optical and scanning types of microscope usually use lenses in some form, 
so we will now review some of the basic ideas of lens optics and define the 
necessary terminology. The simplest optical microscope, which has been in usc 
since the early seventeenth century, is a single convex lens or 'magnifying glass'. 
The ray diagram for this is shown in Figure 1.2 and serves to illustrate the 
concepts offocallength ,J and magnification, M. The image is magnified, real 
and inverted if the object distance 11 (between lens and object) is between/ and 
2f.. as shown in Figure 1.2(a) and in MA ITER: Introduction to Electron 
Microscopes. The image is erect but virtual if the object is within the focal 
distance (i.e. the object distance is between zero and J Figure 1.2(b». If an 
image is to be recorded on a photographic plate or viewed on a screen then it 
must be real, and therefore we will not be concerned with optical arrangements 
which give rise to virtual final images. 
If the object is further from the lens than 2/(Figure 1.2(e» the image is de­
magnified, that is the magnification is less than unity. Notice that Figures 
1.2(a) and 1.2(e) are essentially the same (although drawn backwards) if we 
interchange the words 'object" and 'image'. This illustrates one of the 
important features of an optical system -its effect on the light rays does not 
depend on the direction in which they arc supposed to be travelling. This 
'principle of reciprocity' was propounded by Helmholtz in 1886 and will be 
of usc when we consider the scanning transmission elcctron microscope 
(STEM) in Chaptcr 7. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpMicroscopy with light and electrons 5 
The conclusions drawn above about the behaviour of a convex lens of focal 
distance I are summarized in the thin lens equation 
I I I -=-+­I II V (l.l ) 
where II is the 'object distance' (the distance from the lens to the object) and v is 
the 'image distance'. Figure 1.2(b) shows that, by similar triangles, the magni­
fication M produced by the single lens is given by V/II. Substituti on in the lens 
equation gives 
M= f 
II -1 ( 1.2) 
from which it can be deduced that for large magnification II -I must be small 
and positive. This is achieved by placing the object just outside the focal point 
of the lens. 
Magnification of an object without severe distortion is very limited using a 
single lens. Strictly the image in Figure 1.2(a) should be curved so that all 
points on it are equidistant from the lens centre. If the magnification is high 
this effect is considerable and the image seen in anyone plane will appear 
distorted. For high magnifications therefore, combinations of lenses are used 
so that the tOl<1I magnification is achieved in two or more stages. A simple two­
stage photomicroscope will have the ray diagram shown in Figure 1.3. 
The first lens, the objectil'e, provides an inverted image at B with a magnifica­
tion (VI -/1)/11 and the second lens, the projector, gives a final upright image 
at a further magnification of (V2 -12)/12. The image is viewed on a screen or 
recorded on a photographic plate at C with a total magnification of 
( 1.3) 
If higher magnification s are required it is quite straightforward to add a second 
projector lens to provide a third stage of magnification. 
Figure /.1 The ray diagram of a simple two-stage projection microscrope. The object is at 0 
and the final image at C. with an intermediate image at B. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp6 Electron microscopy and analysis 
('I 
(bl Conden~r 
apcnure 
I 
A 
Object 
Condenser 
tens 
Objective 
lens and ,,,,-Objective 
I,~ 
Light source B ___ ~ 
Projeetor 
lens C 
Image 
Figure 1.4 The optical systems for the two common types of projection microscope. (a) 
Transmission illumination, (b) Reflected illumination. 
We have so far assumed that the object itself is self-luminous, and we have 
therefore shown the 'rays' starting at the object and ending at the viewing 
screen. In practice we arc rarely able to look at this sort of specimen and we 
must illuminate it with light from a convenient source. We arc now forced to 
consider whether the object is mainly transparent , in which case we illuminate 
it from behind, or whether it is opaque, in which case we must illuminate it 
from the fronl. Thus, immediately, we have a division into two elasses of 
optical microscope: the biologist who needs to look at very thin sections of 
tissue uses a transmission arrangement such as that shown in Figure 1.4(0), 
while the materials scientist or geologist who needs to examine the surface 
structure of a solid specimen uses a reflection arrangement as shown in 
Figure 1.4(b). The same two types of electron-optical arrangement arise in 
electron microscopy , leading to TEM and SEM instruments. In this case 
both types of instrument are used in almost all fields of seiencc. 
The essential parts of any illumination system are a light source and a 
condenser system. The condenser is neccssary to collect the light which is 
diverging from the source and to direct it at the small area of the specimen 
zzzPsgiolePfrpMicroscopy with light and electrons 7 
Figure 1.5 An optical micrograph of a polished specimen of AI-16% Si. (Monica Hughes, 
University of Liverpoo l) 
which is to be examined. This serves two purposes; it makes the object appear 
brighter so that it can be seen more easily (also improving its cOlltrast) and it 
also enables the microscopist to eontrol the angle at which the illuminati on 
arrives at the speeimen. The beam can be made to converge on the specimen or 
can illuminat e it with parallel rays. It will be shown later that in electron 
microscopy the concepts of contrast and convergence angle are rather 
important and we will deal with them in greater detail in Chapters 3, 4 and 5. 
In early light microscopes the sun or ordinary diffuse daylight was used as a 
source and a concave mirror was used to direct the light towards the specimen. 
For many purposes this is adequate but for more demanding work it is more 
usual to find a built-in light source and a condenser lens as shown in Figure 1.4. 
With the addition of two variable apertures near the condenser lens and the 
objective lens it is possible to control the area of spccimen which is illuminat ed 
and the angular spread of the light collected from the specimen. With a well­
made microscope , micrographs such as that shown in Figure 1.5 can be taken. 
1.5 Magnification 
In principle it is possible to make a light microscope which will produce any 
sclccted magnification. However, since for convenienc e the instrument should 
be compact, without too many adjustments, it is usual to alter II or 12 in 
equation 1.3 rather than VI or V2. This means that in order to change the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp8 Electron microscopy and analysis 
magnification, one lens is usually exchanged for another with a different focal 
length, giving a limited set of fIXed magnifications. The alternative is to alter 
the distances between all the components of the microscope and this is 
generally less convenient. We will see later that this problem does not arise 
in electron microscopes, where all the parameters arc more easily adjusted. 
Although it was stated in the last section that the total magnification of the 
microscope can easily be increased by adding additional lenses it turns out that 
for the vast majority of purposes the two-lens system shown in Figure 1.3 is 
quite sufficient. The reason for this is simple; the smallest details which can 
usefully be distinguished in a light microscope are about 200 nm in size 
(2 x 1O-7m: lOOOnm= I pm; lOOOpm= I mm). The reason for this limit is 
discussed in the next section but for the moment let us consider its implication. 
The unaided human eye can easily detect detail only 0·2 mm in size. Therefore 
there is very little point in magnifying the smallest details which can be resolved 
(200 nm) up to a larger size than O· 2 mm (200 ~Im). Thus any magnification 
greater than lOOOx only makes the details bigger. We cannot make finer 
details visible by magnifying the image an extra ten times. An example of 
this ·empty magnification', as it is called, is shown in Figure 1.6. The first 
micrograph has a magnification of 70x and we see a lot of detail. 
Magnifying this several times more, to 300 x reveals more detail. However a 
further stage of magnification to 1400x or higher shows us no more; the 
features are further apart but no elearer. If a large display is needed, for 
example in order to view the micrograph at a distance, it is more sensible to 
enlarge a lOOOx micrograph photographically than to build a microscope 
capable of higher magnifications. Now it is relatively easy to provide magnifi­
cations of 1000 x with only the two-lens system of Figure 1.3, for example using 
an SOx objective lens and a 15x projector lens. Consequently it is not 
necessary to build a light microscope with three or more stages of magnifica­
tion, since this will not improve the resolution but will rather degrade it by 
introducing extra aberrations (sec section I.S). However the scanning electron 
microscope has inherently better resolution and it makes sense to use it at 
higher magnifications, as Figure 1.6 shows. 
1.6 Resolution 
In order to compare the electron microscope with the light microscope we need 
to know what factors control the resolution (often called resolving power) 
which we will define as the closest spacing of two points which can clearly 
be seen through the microscope to be separate entities. Notice that this is not 
necessarily the same as the smallest point which can be seen with the micro­
scope, which will often be smaller than the resolution limit. 
Even if all the lenses of the microscope were perfect and introduced no 
distortions into the image, the resolution would nevertheless be limited by a 
diffraction effect. inevitably in any microscope the light must pass through a 
zzzPsgiolePfrp1'1 
I') 
1<1 
1 
Light 
micrographs Idl 
1'1 
If) Scanning 
electron 
micrographs 
J 
• 
Figure /.6 A series of light and SEM micrographs of the high temperature superconductor 
barium yttrium copper oxide at increasing magnification. Original magnifications 
(a)70x: (bland (d) 300 x: «()and (e) 1400 x and «() 2OOOx. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp10 Electron microscopy and analysis 
(. ) (b) 
Figure 1.7 Airy rings resulting from the diffraction ci a laser beam by small pinholes. (a) 75 flm 
diameter: (b) IOOflm diameter. 
series of restricted openings -the lenses themselves or the apertures shown in 
Figure 1.4. Wherever light passes through an aperture, diffraction occurs so 
that a parallel beam of light (which would be seen as a spot) is transformed into 
a series of cones, which arc seen as circles and arc known as Airy rings. Figure 
1.7 shows this effect with a laser beam and two small pinholes. For light of a 
given wavelength the diameter of the central spot is inversely proportional to 
the diameter of the aperture from which the diffraction is occurring. 
Consequently the smaller the aperture, the larger is the central spot of the 
Airy disc. We have used very small apertures in order to make the Airy disc 
elearly visible but the same effects occur from the relatively larger apertures 
found in light microscopes. The diffraction effect limits the resolution of a 
microscope bccause the light from every small point in the object suffers 
diffraction, particularly by the objcctive aperture, and even an infinitely 
small point beeomes a small Airy dise in the image. In order to make this 
dise as small as possible, in other words to make the image of each point as 
small as possible, the aperture must be as large as is feasible. 
Now let us consider the resolution of the microscope in more detail, starting 
with the Airy disc. Figure 1.8 shows the variation of the light intensity across 
the series of rings which make up the disc. The central spot is very much more 
intense than any other ring and in fact contains 84% of all the light intensity. 
Consequently for many purposes the rings can be ignored and we can assume 
that all the light falls in a spot of diameter dl, where dl ex I/(aperture 
diameter). Consider how far apart two of these spots must be in the image 
before they arc distinguishable as two -this distance is the resolution which 
was defined earlier. Lord Rayleigh proposed a criterion which works well in 
most cases and has been used extensively ever since; when the maximum of 
intensity of an Airy disc coincides with the first minimum of the second, then 
the two points can just be distinguished. This is illustrated in Figure 1.9, from 
zzzPsgiolePfrpMicroscopy with light and electron s II 
Intensity 
Distance 
Figure /.8 The variation of light intensity across a set ci Airy rings. Most ci the intensity (84%) 
lies within the first ring. that is within a spot of diameter dl. 
Intensity 
• • 
f • • , 
Distance 
Figure /.9 The intensity of the Airy rings from two neighbouring pinholes. The intensity distri­
butions from each of the pinholes separately are shown as solid lines: the combined 
profile from the two pinholes acting together is shown dotted. At the Rayleigh reso­
lution limit, as shown here. the maximum intensity from one pinhole coincides 
with the first minimum from the other. This gives a resolution limit of dl /2. 
which it can be seen that the resolution limit is d1/2. Microscope apertures are 
normally referred to in terms of the semi-angle, i'I., which they subtend at the 
specimen (Figure 1.10). It is then possible to derive from diffraction theory (see 
any text on optics) the relationship; 
d, 
rl = T = ).I sm i'I. 0.61A ( 1.4) 
where ). is the wavelength of the light and ).I is the refractive index of the 
medium between the object and the objective lens. The product, ).I sin i'I. is 
usually called the IIl/merical aperfllre (NA). 
zzzPsgiolePfrp12 Electron microscopy and analysis 
a --------------------
Object 
Objcctive 
lens 
Figure /./0 The definition of the half-angle. IY.. subtended 
objective aperture). I 
---. 
IObjOClive 
apenure 
by an aperture (in this case the 
In order to obtain the best resolution (i.e. the smallest rd it is obviously 
possible to decrease A or increase p or ct. With a light microscope A can be 
decreased to 400 nm by using green light (or to about 200 nm ifit is possible to 
use ultraviolet light); sin i1 can be increased towards I by using as large an 
aperture as possible and p can be increased by using an oil immersion objective 
lens. However it is impractical to make ~lsini1 much greater than about 1·6 
since sin i1 must be less than unity and even very exotic materials are limited to 
a refractive index of about 1·7. The absolute resolution limit using green light is 
therefore about ISO nm (0.15 pm). Even sophisticated image processing cannot 
improve on this fundamental limit. 
1.7 Depth of field and depth offocus 
In any microscope the image is only accurately in focus when the object lies in 
the appropriate plane (strictly the surface of a sphere). If part of the object 
being viewed lies above or below this plane then the equivalent part of the 
image will be out of focus. The range of positions for the object for which our 
eye can detect no change in the sharpness of the image is known as the dept!, of 
field. In most microscopes this distance is rather small and therefore in order to 
produce sharp images the object must be very flat. If a non-flat object (or a 
transparent object of appreciable thickness) is viewed at high magnification 
using a light microscope then some out-of-focus regions will be seen. This is a 
useful feature if we wish to accentuate certain parts of the image at the expense 
of others but is a grave disadvantage if we would like to see all parts of a three­
dimensional object clearly. 
In the 1990s clever optical design and the use of scanning have led to the 
development of confocal light microscopes which exploit the intrinsic narrow 
depth of field to build up a 'three-dimensional' image which when viewed is in 
focus over a range of depths. This is described in more detail in Chapter 7. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpMicroscopy with light and electrons 13 
aperture 
plane of 
-------~--optimum 
focus 
Figure I. / 1 The depth offocus of an optical system, h. is the distance from the plane of optimum 
focus within which the beam diverges by no more than the spot diameter d,. dl 
will be limited by diffrattion and aberrations. 
The depth of field can be estimated from Figure 1.11. whieh shows rays 
converging at the specimen. Since the diffraction effect described in section 
1.6 will limit the resolution at the specimen to 'I (given by equation 1.4) it will 
not make any difference to the sharpness of the image if the object is anywhere 
within the range II shown in Figure 1.11. Simple geometry then gives: 
0.6D. 
h=~='---­
~I sin i'l.tan i'I. ( 1.5) 
from which it is evident that the only effective way to increase the depth of field 
is to decrease the convergence angle, which is controlled in most cases by the 
objective aperture, as Figure 1.10 shows. Notice that conditions which 
maximize the depth of field simultaneously make the resolution worse 
(equation 1.4). For a light microscope. where i'I. might be in the region of 
45 degrccs. the depth of field is not very different from the resolution. Even 
if the objective convergence is limited to 5 degrees the depth of field will only be 
about 40 pm. while the resolution will then be limited to about 3 pm. 
It will become apparent later that the use of electrons for microscopy brings 
a number of advantages. among which are an improvement in barll resolution 
and depth offield. The reason for this is that high energy electrons have a much 
smaller wavelength than light (see Chapter 2) and the microscopes are usually 
operated with very small values of i'I.. 
A term which is often confused with depth offield is the depth ojjoClls. This 
refers to the range of positions at which the image can be viewed without 
appearing out of focus, for a fIXed position of the objec\. Depth of focus is 
often not as important as the depth of field to a microscopist, but in any case 
tends to be larger, as the following calculation shows. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp14 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Equation 1.1 can bc differentiated (ror constant rocal length) to give: 
do 
dll ( 1.6) 
This shows that dv, the effective shirt in image position, is related to dll, the 
change in position or the object, via the square or the magnification. The 
negative sign arises because the shirts are in opposite directions, which does 
not concern us. Thus ir dll is set to be the depth or field, caleulated perhaps 
rrom equation 1.5, the equivalent depth orrocus is a ractor A/2 bigger. At any 
reasonable magnification the depth or rOClIS will thererore be large, and at the 
high magnifications which are sometimes encountered in electron microscopy it 
will be huge (orten more than ten metres). Microscopists should thererore 
experience little difficulty in positioning their viewing screen or photographic 
film. 
1.8 Aberrations in optical systems 
In discussing resolution and depth or field it has been assumed that all the 
componcnts or the microseopc arc pcrrect and will rocus the light rrom any 
point on the object to a similar unique point in the image. This is in ract rather 
difficult to achieve because or lens aberrations. Thc easiest lenses to make (ror 
light) are those with sphcrical surraces but any single sphcricallens suffers rrom 
two typcs or aberration -chromatic aberrations which depcnd on thc spectrum 
or wavelengths in the light and lIIollochromlllic or acllrOil/lIli c aberrations which 
affect even light or a single wavelength. The effect or each aberration is to 
distort the image or every point in the object in a particular way, leading to 
an overall loss or quality and resolution in the image. In order to correct these 
aberrations it is necessary to replace the single lens in the figurcs with 
compound lenses containing several carerully shaped pieces or glass with 
different rerractive indices. Although this is not a correction technique which 
can be used in the elcctron microscope, the same types or aberration arise and 
are very important in determining the resolution or the instrument. Thererore 
the most significant aberrations must be considered in more detail. 
Chromatic aberrations occur when a range or wavelengths is present in the 
light (e.g. in 'white' light) and arise because a single lens causes light to be 
deviated by an amount depending on its wavelength. Thus a lens will have 
different rocal lengths ror light or different wavelengths. To take an extreme 
example, a red rocus and a blue rOClIS will be rormed rrom white light. Figure 
1.12 makes this elear in terms or ray paths and illustrates that wherever the 
image is viewed a coloured halo will surround each detail. For example ir the 
viewing screen is placed at A, the image or a point will appear as a 'bluish' dot 
with a red halo, whereas ir the screen were at B the dot would be 'reddish' with 
a blue halo. In neither case is a truly rocused image or a small white dot 
zzzPsgiolePfrpwhite 
light Microscopy with light and electrons 15 
Disc of 
'>:" •. ::::.::........ confusion .... .............. ~ 1 ..... . . '" .. ' ..... ..... ..' ". . ... "".. .' ........ ..... . .... ~ ......... . 
------- ----~----~-----....... ..'>-<....... . .••... .. ' ....... . .... . . "'::~ .. :.:::::::: :.......... ....... . .......... . least c 
A blue 
focus B red 
roc", 
Figure I. / 2 Ray diagram illustrating the introduct ion of chromatic aberration by a single lens. 
Light of shorter wavelength (blue) is brought to a focus nearer the lens than the 
longer wavelength (red) light. The smallest 'focused' spot is the disc ci least con­
fusion at C. 
formed. With the screen at the compromise position C the smallest image is 
formed. but it is not a point but a disc of leasl confusion. 
All aberration corrections are designed to reduce in size this disc of 
confusion. In the light microscope there are two ways in which chromatic 
aberrations can be improved. either by combining lenses of different shapes 
and refractive indices or by eliminating the variation in wavelength from the 
light source by the use of filters or special lamps. Both methods arc often used 
if the very best resolution is required. 
Monochromati c aberrations arise because of the different path lengths of 
different rays from an object point to the image point. The simplest of these 
effects is spllerical aherralioll. which is illustrated in Figure 1.13. The portion of 
the lens furthest from the optical axis brings rays to a focus nearer the lens than 
docs the central portion of the lens. Another way of expressing this concept is 
to say that the optical ray path length from object point to focused imagc point 
should always be the same. This naturally implies that thc focus for marginal 
----Disc of 
least 
confusion 
I 
focus 
Figure /./3 Ray diagram illustrating spherical aberration. Marginal rays are brought to focus 
nearer the lens than near-axial rays. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp16 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Disc of 
least 
horiwntal 
focal line 
1 
focal line 
Figure 1.14 Ray diagram illustrating the formation of astigmatism for a lens with slightly differ­
ent optical properties in the horizontal and vertical directions. In this illustration 
the lens is more powerful in the vertical plane. 
rays is nearer to the lens than the foeus for paraxial rays (those which are 
almost parallel to the axis). Again a disc of least eonfusion exists at the best 
compromise position of focus. 
A related effect is that of astigmatism. For object points off the optical axis 
the path length criterion shows that there will be a focus for rays travelling in 
the horizontal plane at a different position from the focus for rays travelling 
in the vertical plane drawn in Figure 1.2(a). A similar, but more serious, effect 
oecurs if a lens does not have identical properties across the whole of its area. 
As an example Figure 1.14 shows the effect for a lens with slightly different 
properties in the horizontal and vertical planes. All the monochromatic aberra­
tions arc reduced if only the central portion of the lens is used, i.e. if the lens 
aperture is 'stopped down'. Unfortunately, as explained in section \.6, this 
limits the resolution of the microscope. 
Other aberrations are often discussed in textbooks on optics but the three 
mentioned here arc those of prime concern in electron microscopy. One 
further effect which is sometimes troublesome, particularly at low magnifica­
tion, is distortion. This oecurs if for some reason the magnification of the 
lens changes for rays off the optical axis. The two possible cases arc when 
magnification increases with distance from the optical axis, leading to pin­
cushion distortion, and when magnification decreases with distance from the 
optical axis, leading to barrel distortion (Figure 1.15). These effects arc 
obviously of great importance if measurements are to be made from micro­
graphs and manufacturers of both light microscopes and electron 
microscopes try to ensure that they arc minimized. 
1,9 Electrons versus light 
In very many ways electron optics is just the same as light optics -all the 
terminology used in this chapter applies and ray diagrams can be used to 
illustrate the working of electron microscopes. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpMicroscopy with light and electrons 17 
,------' ----. ----, .. , 
181 Ibl 
Figure I, / 5 The appearance of a square grid in the presence of (a) barrel and (b) pincushion 
distortion. 
For many purposes it is adequate to think of light as eleetromagnetic 
radiation with a wavelength ;.. and of electrons as sub-atomic partieles. Both 
types of description (ware and particle) of course apply to both light and 
electrons: thus light may be described in terms of photons or as radiation 
of wavelength 400-700 nm, while electrons can also be considered as 
radiation with wavelengths (useful in microscopy) between about 0·001 and 
0·0\ nm. The first obvious difference between electrons and light is that 
their wavelengths differ by a factor of many thousands. The implications of 
this for microscopy are immense but fortunately in most cases lead to a 
simplification. 
Another major difference is that electrons are very much more strongly 
scattered by gases than is light. This is so severe an effect that in order to 
use electrons in a microscope all the optical paths must be evacuated to a 
pressure of better than 10-10 Pa (about 10-7 of atmospheric pressure) ; the 
electrons would scarcely penetrate a fcw millimetrcs of air at atmosphcric 
prcssure. 
Since, as will be shown in the next chapter, the lenses in an electron micro­
scope are merely magnetic fields there is a negligible change of refractive index 
as the electrons pass through each lens. Henee in electron-optical calculations p 
can be assumed to be unity. Furthermore the angles through which the 'rays' 
need to be deflected are generally very small (a few degrees) and the approxi­
mation sin Cl = tan (';( = Cl (Figure 1.10, in radians) holds to a very high degree 
of aecuracy. These simplifications mean that the theoretical resolution of the 
electron microscope (equation 1.4) can be written as: 
" 0·6D. ( 1.7) 
which implies a resolution of about 0·02 nm, using reasonable values of 
>. =0·0037 nm (the wavelength of 100 kV electrons) and (';( =0.1 radians 
(about 5 degrees). This is much smaller than the size of a single atom. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp18 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Unfortunately, however, in the trallSmissioll electron microscope (TEM) this 
sort of resolution cannot be obtained bccausc of the lens aberrations. 
Whereas in a light microscope it is possible to correct both chromatic and 
achromatic aberrations by using subtle combinations of lenses, this is very 
difficult using electron lenses and has only been seriously allempted in the 
1990s. Consequently although chromatic aberrations can be virtually 
eliminated by using electrons of a very small range of wavelengths it is not 
possible to eliminate the monochromatic aberrations, principally spherical 
aberration. The only way of minimizing this is to restrict the electrons to 
paths very ncar the optical axis, i.e. ncar the centre of the lens, by using a 
small objective aperture. The importance of doing this can be seen from the 
cquation for thc dcgradation of rcsolution caused by sphcrical aberration in a 
lcns of aberration coefficient, C. 
-c ' '2 -.,tl ( 1.8) 
Thc usc of a small apcrture thus reduccs spherical aberration but makes the 
diffraction-limited resolution worse. There is an optimum size of aperture (i.e. 
valuc of CI:) for which thc nct rcsolution is smallest. This can be calculated quite 
easily by assuming that the nct resolution is given by, = 'I +'2 and minimiz­
ing , with respect to tl. Thc result is: 
Cl:oP! = 0.6n..1/4C.;-lj4 
Under slightly different conditions it turns out 
improved and the factor 1·21 can be reduced to (1. 9) 
that the resolution can be 
as low as 0·7 in favourable 
circumstances. (Notice that a similar caleulation is uscd. with an alternative 
dcrivation, to arrive at the resolution limit of thc scanning electron microscope 
(SEM) in section 5.5.1.) Using the optimum apcrture it is now possiblc with a 
good TEM to resolve two points about 0·2 nm apart. This is approximately the 
separation of atoms in a solid. 
Since it is necessary to keep tl small in order to red uce the effect of spherical 
abcrrations, electron microscopcs always gain the advantage of a largc depth of 
field. Equation 1.5 can be re-wrillen using the approximations appropriate to 
electrons as: 
0,,-,::;6 I,,). 
11=-cr' (1.10) 
which shows that as CI: is rcduced thc depth of field increases very rapidly. This 
is one of the major advantages of electron microscopy. 
A further major difference between electrons and light is that electrons carry 
a charge. Not only does this mean that elcctromagnetic fields can be used as 
lenses for elcctrons but it opens up thc possibility of easily scanning a beam of 
electrons back and forth, as happens in a cathodc ray tube or a television tube. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpMicroscopy with light and electrons 19 
The application of this approach has led 10 the development of the scanning 
electron microscope which, as is shown in Chapter 5, has over the past thirty­
five years revolutionized attitudes to the study of surfaces. 
With both types of electron microscope, transmission and scanning, the use 
of electromagnetic lenses and deflection coils means that it is possible to obtain 
an image of a specimen at any magnification within a wide range (say up to 
I 000 000 x), without physically changing or moving lenses. Electron micros­
copy therefore offers higher resolution , higher magnification, greater depth of 
field and greater versatility than the light microscope, albeit at a rather higher 
pnce. 
LlO Questions 
I If a small object is placed 2mm aw<ty from a convex lens offOd.lllength I mm, 
how far from the lens will the image be formed? 
2 Where is the image produced by a thin convex lens when the object is at the 
focal point? 
3 How many convex lenses, with focal length I mm and objcct distance (/I) 
1·1 mm, are J1(x:ded to give a final image with magnification I million timcs? 
4 In a light microscope an object is placed 2 mm away from a lens of diamcter 
2mm. Thc object is in air (refr:.tctive index = I) and the wavelcngth of the 
(green) light is 520 nm. What is the best possible resolving power of this 
microscope? 
5 Calculate the position of the image and its magnifiC1.lIion when an object is 
held lOcm from a convex lens of focal length 8cm. 
6 Calculate the depth of field for a resolving power of I ~\m in a microscope with 
a final aperture of diameter I mm and a working distanL"C of 20 mm. What is 
the depth of focus at a magnifiC1.lIion of lOOx? 
7 If lenses with maximum useful magnifiC1.ltions of 40 x arc available, how many 
lenses are needed to achieve magnifiC1.lIions of: lOOx, lOOOOx, I million x? 
8 What arc the dimensions of C? Deduce the approximate value of C for (a) 
an electron microscope capable of O· I nm resolution, and (b) a light micro­
scope capable of 0·5 mm resolution. 
9 ·Chromati c aberrations can be virtually eliminated by using electrons of a very 
small range of wavelengths: Why, in a TEM, can chromatic aberr:.ttions never 
be completely eliminate d? 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChapter 2 
Electrons and their interaction 
with the specimen 
2.1 Introduction 
When thinking about light microscopy we tend to ignore most of the interac­
tions between the light and the specimen. It is sufficient that enough light is 
transmit ted through or rcl1cclcd from the specimen that the image can casily be 
seen. The assumption is generally made that the specimen is unchange d by the 
fact thaI it has been observed and for most specimens this is a reasonable 
assumption. However. the interaction of electrons with the material through 
which they pass may have more serious consequences. For example, as pointed 
out in Chapler I, because of the scallcring of electrons by gas molecules in the 
air, the column of an electron microscope muSI be evacuated. Some other real 
possibilities arc that the specimen will be heated by the electron beam and that 
chemical changcs may take place. 
It is elearly important, in order to appreciate the way in which an electron 
microscope works and the meaning of the information which it provides, that 
we understand the nature of the possible interactions between the electron 
beam and the other parts of the microscope (e.g. lenses or camera) and 
between the electrons and the specimen. In order to achieve this understanding 
it is necessary to consider in more detail the nature of the electron and the 
various possible interactions between an electron and an atom. Those readers 
who need only a very superficial understanding of electron microscopy or who 
wish to gct the 'feel' of thc subject on a first rcading may like to skip the rest of 
this chapter and the ncxt and pass on to Chapter 4. 
2.2 Electrons 
Two schematic ways of looking at thc structurc of a typical isolatcd atom are 
shown in Figure 2.1. The nucleus carries a positive charge and is surrounded by 
a number of negative electrons which exactly neutralize this charge. Whcn 
atoms are close to one another in a solid most of their electrons remain 
'localized' -that is they can be considered to remain associated with a particu­
lar atom -but some outcr electrons will be shared, to an extent which depends 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectrons and their interaction with the specimen 21 
--- -F, 0 keY 
\1, -0.4 keY 
===== L, -2.5 keV 
----- K, -20 keY 
Figure 2.1 Two alternative representations of the first three electron shells around a molybde­
num atom. The innermost (K shell) electrons are the most tightly bound. and they 
would need to be given approximately 2Q keY before they could leave the atom. 
on the type of bonding with neighbouring atoms. Several conventions have 
been developed to describe the states and energies of localized electrons -two 
of the most widespread will be described here. 
1I is common to define the zero of the energy scale as the potential energy of 
a frcc electron far from any atom, F. The energies of localized electrons arc 
then negative, as shown in Figure 2.1. Alternatively, spectroscopists refer to a 
positive 'binding energy' or the energy of the atom with the specified electron 
missing, which is the negative of the energy shown in the figure. Table 2.1 gives 
Table2.1 Electron states. 
Sub-shell 
Shell KLM spd( Passible number a( electrans 
K K I , 2 
L LI 2, 2 
L2 2p 2 
Ll 2p 4 
M MI 3, 2 
M2 3p 2 
M3 3p 4 
M4 3d 4 
M5 3d 6 
N NI 4, 2 
N2 4p 2 
N3 4p 4 
N4 4d 4 
N5 4d 6 
N6 4f 6 
N7 4f 8 
zzzPsgiolePfrp22 Electron microscopy and analysis 
the 'KLM' and 'spdf descriptions of the 16 lowest energy states, together with 
the number of electrons which each can hold. These states arc not necessarily 
occupied by electrons. A very light element such as helium, which only has two 
elcctrons, will have electrons in its K shell only and its L, M and higher shells 
will be empty. Uranium , with an atomic number of92 and hence 92 electrons, 
has electrons in the K, L, M, N, 0, P and Q shells. This nomenelature is defined 
and explained graphically in the MATTER module 'Introduction to Electrons 
in Crystals' (sec bibliography). 
For atoms which arc bonded to others the energy level diagram must be 
modified because the Pauli exclusion principle forbids shared electrons to 
occupy the same states. This leads to the development of energy bands, 
the most common of which arc referred to as the valence and conduction 
bands. In a metal the conduction band holds the familiar 'sea of electrons' 
which arc responsible for conduction and much of the bonding. It is not 
necessary to consider atomic bonding in detail in order to understand 
electron microscopy, but the important terms which must be understood 
inelude: 
Inner shell electrons: the lowest energy electrons, neareSt to the nucleus, usually 
in the K or L shell. These electrons have very sharply defined energies, and are 
localized. 
Outer electrons: the highest energy electrons (i.e. those with the lowest 
binding energies). In an isolated atom these will be in the outermost occupied 
shell. 
Conduction bond: shared outer electrons with a range of possible energies. 
These are de localized. 
Outer electrons are fairly readily detached from their atoms since only a 
small amount of energy need be supplied. It is this easy availability and low 
mass which makes 'free' electrons so useful. We must now consider the char­
acteristics of a free electron in more detail. 
An electron, considered as a particle, carries a single negative charge, e, of 
1·6 x 1O-19C and has a rest mass, //Ie of about 9 x 10-31 kg. If a single electron 
is accelerated through a potential difference V volts then its energy is V 
electron volts (eV). If V is large then its velocity, v, may well approach the 
velocity of light. c, and relativistic effects will become important. One of these 
is that its mass will increase according to the equation 
III = [I _ (v/c)2J1/2 (2. I ) 
If the electron is now considered as a wave then its wavelength and momentum 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectrons and their interaction with the specimen 23 
Table 2.2 Electron Wavelengths. 
V (kV) 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
1000 Wavelength), (nm) 
Uncorrected 
0·0086 
0·0061 
0·0050 
0·0043 0·0039 
0·0027 
0·0022 0·0019 
0·0017 
0·0012 
c=
2·998x 108ms-1 
e = 1.602 x 1O-19C 
h = 6.62 X 10-)9 Js 
m~ = 9.108 x 10-11 kg 
arc related by the de Broglie relationship 
II II A=-=­p IIIV Relativistically corrected 
00086 
00060 
0·0049 
0·0042 
0·0037 
0·0025 
0·0020 
0·0016 
0·0014 
00009 
(2.2) 
where II is the Planck constant. I n addition the energy given to the electron, e V, 
can be equated to the energy represented by the relativistic change of mass, so 
eV = (III _1II,.)C2 (2.3) 
Combination of equations 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 shows that the wavelength of the 
electron depends on the potential difference, or accelerating I'oltage, in the 
following way: 
which, on substitution of the values for II, e, lIIe and c, becomes: 
(2.4) 
At the accelerating voltages which are most useful for electron microscopy 
(2 x 104 V upwards) the electrons are accelerated to a velocity which is a 
significant fraction of the velocity of light and relativistic effects are quite 
important. Consequently the wavelcngth must be calculated according to 
equation 2.4 and not according to the common approximation A = 
(I.S/V)I/2nm. 
As Table 2.2 shows, the effcct of relativity is quite marked for high accel­
erating voltages, amounting to a 25% correction at one million volts. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp24 Electron microscopy and analysis 
P 
J I II I 
F 
W ' 1\' , , , ' R. 
, , , , F , , , ' W , , , , lOOkV 
A ' , , ' , , , ' , , , ' A , , , ' , , , ' , , , ' 
" " " , V , 
(. ) (0) 
Figure 2.2 The geometry and electrical layout of a thermionic triode electron gun. (0) The elec­
trons are emitted from a small region at the tip of a heated tungsten filament (F) 
and are accelerated towards the anode (A). The fields generated between the fila­
ment and the anode. modified by the Wehnelt cylinder (yV) acting as a grid. cause 
the electrons to be focused at V. which is known as the virtual source. (b) The fIla­
ment is heated by the passage of a current from the power supply P and the voltage 
on the grid is determined by the bias resistor Rb. 
2.3 Generating a beam of electrons 
Of the many ways of encouraging electrons to leave a solid so that they may be 
accelerated towards the spccimen, two have proved particularly useful in the 
construction of e1ectroll gllIlS. The most widespread system uses thermionic 
emission from a heated filament. At temperatures in excess of 2700 K, for 
instance, a tungsten wire emits an abundance of both light and electrons; in 
a light bulb only the light is used but in an electron gun the electrons are 
accelerated across a potential difference of tens or hundreds of kilovolts to 
generate a beam of electrons of controlled energy (and hence of known wave­
length). The general features of a thermionic triode electron gun are shown in 
Figure 2.2. Notice that a small current flows when the potential is applied but 
before the filament current is high enough to give rise to thermionic emission. 
This is known as the dark current, Idarb since it flows before the filament is hot 
enough to emit light. 
A piece of tungsten, usually a wire bent into a hairpin, acts as the cathode. 
This filament (F) is heated by the passage of a current to about 2800 K while 
being held at a high negative potential with respect to the anode (A) and the 
rest of the microscope. Electrons thermionically emitted from the filament are 
accelerated rapidly towards the anode and a beam of high energy electrons is 
emitted through the circular hole at its centre into the microscope column. The 
addition of a Wehnelt cap (W), which is held at a voltage slightly more negative 
than the filament, enables the diameter of the area at the end of the filament 
which emits electrons to be controlled. The Wehnelt cap acts rather like the 
grid in a triode valve (or the base in a bipolar transistor) and hence this gun is 
zzzPsgiolePfrpBeam 
current Electrons and their interaction with the specimen 25 
,_I --=~--i------==-
L-- To Fila",,;nt 
current 
Figure 2.1 The electron emission curve for a triode gun. As the filament current is increased the 
beam current rises steeply but then saturates when the filament current reaches Ie. 
usually called a triode gun. An important feature of the gun is that the paths of 
the emitted electrons usually eross at one point in space and the gun acts as a 
lens. The diameter of the beam at the crossover is dependent on the area of the 
filament which is emitting electrons and this can be controlled by the difference 
in potential betwcen the filament and the grid (i.e. by Rb, the value of the bias 
resistor in Figure 2.2). The crossover diameter, analogous to the disc of least 
confusion whieh was defined in Chapter I, is effectively the size of the electron 
source, and is of great imporlance in calculating the resolution of a scanning 
electron microscope. 
The triode circuit shown in Figure 2.2(b) acts rather subtly to limit the 
current in the emitted electron beam. As the emitted current increases, so 
docs the bias voltage and this suppresses further electron emission. This is 
known as the auto bias mechanism and accounts for the characteristic shape 
of the emission curve shown in Figure 2.3. As the current through the filament 
is increased there is an initial rise in the emitted electron beam current. This 
eventually saturates however and there is no point in passing more than the 
critical current Ie through the filament since this merely increases the tempera­
ture of the filament (thus reducing its lifetime) without giving rise to any 
additional beam current. The operation of a triode gun is simulated in the 
MATTER module ·lntroduction to Electron Microscopes' (see bibliography). 
This can be used to experiment with the effect of filament current on the 
emission current. 
The thermionic gun is satisfactory for many purposes but is limited in the 
brightness of the beam it can produce. In the context of electron microscopy 
brightness is defined as the beam current density per unit solid angle, usually 
cited in units of A m-2sr-l.* 
• A steradian (sr) is the unit of solid angle. One steradian is defmed as that solid angle which 
encloses a surface on a sphere equal to the square of its radius. Therefore 411 steradians occupy 
the whole of space. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp26 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Brightness is therefore a measure of how many electrons per seeond can be 
directed at a given area of the specimen. For a beam of current density j, 
(A m -2) with a convergcnce angle Il, the brightness, B, is thus given by: 
B = je/nll2 
For a thermionic gun 8 is limited to 
(2.5) 
wherc T is the temperaturc of the filament in K and $ is the thcrmionic work 
function of thc filament matcrial in elcctron volts. Since B increases rapidly as 
T increases and as $ decrcases , it is best to use a filament matcrial with as high 
a melting point and as Iowa work function as possible. Tungsten has a high 
melting point (3653 K) and a work function which is much the same as most 
metals (4·5eV) and is the most widely used filament matcrial. Tungstcn 
filaments give a brightness of about 109 Am-2 sr-I. However, the brightness 
can be increased by a factor of 10 or more if LaB6, with a work function of 
3·0eV, is used. Electron guns which use LaB6, are quite common on 
microscopes which are used for analytical or high resolution work since in 
both of these fields a high brightness is desirable. 
If still higher brightness is required then the field emissioll g1l11 is used. If a 
metal surface is subjected to an extremely high clectric field (> 109 VIm) there 
is a high probability that an electron can leave the surface without needing to 
be given the amount of energy representcd by the work function. This is 
because the effect predicted by quantum mechanics and known as f1illl1elling 
can oecur. The result is that many more electrons can be drawn from a piece of 
tungsten than is possible using thcrmionic cmission and the brightness can 
be increased by a factor of a thousand or more to a valuc in excess of 
1013 Am-2 sr-I. The field emission currcnt depends very strongly on the 
applied field, F, according to the Fowler-Nordheim equation; 
. _ (ErN)I/2/.-2 (-6.S x 109$3/2) _, 
J = 6·2 x \0 6 ( ) exp Am -Er + $ F 
where Er is the Fermi energy, which is about 5eV for tungsten at room 
temperature. For a field in excess of about 5 x 109 Vm-I the current emitted 
by field emission at room temperature exceeds that which can be thermionically 
emitted. In order to apply such a high field the emitter, usually tungsten, has to 
be prepared in the form of a sharp point. The diameter at the point must be 
about 0·1 ~lm, which is orders of magnitude finer than a pin, so the emitter is a 
rather delicate structure. For this fine point to be preserved in use it must be 
operated in an environment with very few ions and this dictates the use of 
ultra-high-vacuum (UHV) techniques. The vacuum in the gun must be lower 
than 10-7 Pa, which is rather better (and more expensive to achieve) than the 
value of 10-2 or 10-3 Pa which is common in thermionic guns. The gun 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectrons and their interaction with the specimen 27 
Tip support 
----,; ...... ___ Extraction anodc (a fcw kY) 
--__ , .---- Accelerlltion mlUde (e,g. 100 kVj 
" r 
Figure 2.4 A field emission gun. Elearons are extracted from the fine tip by a first anode and 
then accelerated down the column by a second anode at a much higher potential. 
configuration is rather different from the thermionic gun and is shown in 
Figure 2.4. 
An important feature of field emission sources is that the emilled electrons 
have very well defined energies. Whereas the electrons from a thermionic 
source inevitably have an energy spread of 1-2eV, the electrons from a cold 
field emission gun have a much smaller energy spread, usually less than 0·5 eV. 
This is particularly important. as will be shown in Chapter 6. for the inter­
pretation of electron energy loss spectra (EELS). Thus for both analytical and 
high resolution electron microscopy. field emission sources arc important not 
just because they provide a high brightness beam but because they provide a 
'dean' monochromatic supply of electrons. 
2.4 Deflection of electrons -magnetic lenses 
It was realized in the InOs that a beam of electrons could be focused by either 
an electrostatic or a magnetic field. Both types of field have been used in 
electron lenses but the electromagnetic lens is by now virtually universal in 
commercial electron microscopes so we will not consider the earlier electro­
static lenses any further. 
The key to an understanding of what is essentially a very simple lens is the 
direction of the force which acts on a moving electron in a magnetic field. I f an 
electron moving with velocity v experiences a magnetic field of strength B. then 
it suffers a force of F = Bev in a direction perpendicular to both the direction 
of motion and the magnetic field. Expressed more concisely in vector notation: 
F=e(BA,') 
A typical electromagnetic lens is designed to provide a magnetic field almost 
parallel to the direction of travel of the electrons. An electron entering the lens 
(Figure 2.5) experiences a magnetic field B which can conveniently be resolved 
into components B~x along the axis of the microscope and Br~d in a radial 
direction. Initially the electron is unaffected by Ba~, which is parallel to its 
direction of travel, but experiences a small force of magnitude Bradev from 
zzzPsgiolePfrp28 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 2.5 The action ofa typical electromagn etic lens. An electron (e) entering the !ens just off 
the optical axis (dotted) experiences a magnetic field such as that shown in the inset. 
the small radial component. This force causes the electron to travel in a helix 
along the lens. As soon as it starts to spiral it has a component of velocity 
Vcireum perpendicular to the plane of the paper and therefore experienccs a force 
of magnitude Ba., eVcircum in a radial dircction. Thus thc helical path follows a 
tightcr and tighter radius and the effcct is that a parallel bcam of electrons 
cntcring the lens is caused to converge to a point exactly as light is focused by a 
glass lens. If the magnetic field only extcnds over a short distance along the 
axis, then the lens behaves as a 'thin lens' and all the geometrical expressions 
quoted in Chapter I apply. 
In order to generate a magnetic field of just the right strength, size and shape, 
an arrangement similar to that shown in Figure 2.5 is almost invariably used. A 
coil consisting of a large number of turns of wire, W, is wound on a soft iron 
core, C (the pole piece), which has only a very small accurately machined air 
gap, G, across which the field is produced. By varying the current passing 
through the coil, typically in the range 0-1 A, the magnetic field strength and 
hence the focal length of the lens can be varied at will. 
Although the several lenses in anyone electron microscope may differ in 
shape and size they will conform to the general pattern laid out in Figure 2.5. 
An important feature, for which there is no analogy in the light microscope, is 
the spiralling of the electrons as they travel through an electromagnetic lens. 
Since it is very rare for the electron to travel an integral number of turns of the 
spiral as it passes through the lens, in general there is a rotation of the image 
caused by the lens. This is not a distortion, since the image is otherwise 
unaffected, but it does lead to one or two effects, particularly in transmission 
electron microscopes, which need to be borne in mind when looking at micro­
graphs and electron diffraction patterns in later chapters. Cunning design of 
electron-optical systems in modern microscopes sometimes involves using 
lenses in combinations which cancel out the image rotation so that the effect 
is not apparent, although it is still present. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectrons and their interaction with the specimen 29 
Electromagnctic fields arc also used to deflect the entire beam of electrons, 
for example to scan the beam back and forth in a scanning electron micro­
scope. For these applications the field needs to be perpendicular to the electron 
beam, but much smaller fields suffice for these smaller deflections so the coils 
are quite small. Most microscopes will contain a dozen or more such coils, 
designed to enable the microscopist to optimize the position of the beam in the 
column of the microscope. 
The working of a typical lens, together with the operation of lenses and 
deflection coils, is demonstrated in the MATTE R module ·Introduction to 
Electron Microscopes'. 
2.S The scattering of electrons by atoms 
In almost all types of electron microscope prill/ary electrons enter the specimen 
and the same or different electrons leave it again to form the image. 
Consequently it is vitally important to understand the interactions which arc 
possible between high energy electrons and the atoms of the speeimen. Without 
this understanding it is not possible to interpret the image, diffraction pattern 
or analytical spectrum which each type of microscope produces. 
There is a set of terminology eommon to all electron scattering and we will 
eonsider this first. The probability that a particular electron will be scattered in 
a particular way is usually described in terms either of a cross-sectioll, 0, or of a 
mean/ree pllf/i, t,. A cross-section is expressed as the area which the scattering 
particle appears to present to the electron. If there arc N partieles per unit 
volume of the specimen and the cross-section for a particular scattering event is 
( then the probability of a single electron being scattered in this way in its 
passage through a thickness dx of the specimen is Nodx. An alternative way of 
expressing the same idea is to define the mean free path for the scattering as 
A= llNo (2.6) 
A has the dimension length and is effectively the average distance which an 
electron will travel before being scattered in the specificd way. 
Mcan frcc paths for many scattcring processes are similar to the thickness of 
a TEM specimen. This means that electrons will tend to be scattered either 
once or not at all while passing through a thin specimen. On the other hand if 
an electron is incidcnt on a thick specimen (e.g. in an SEM) it will be scattered 
many times until it effectively comes to rest. The terms single sClIlferillg, pl1lral 
sClIlferillg and 1I/1IItiple sClIlferillg are often used to describe the situations in 
which electrons are scattered no more than once, several times and many times 
respectively. 
In single or plural scattering situations the probability of an incident electron 
suffering II scattering evcnts while travelling a distance x is given by the Poisson 
equation 
zzzPsgiolePfrp30 Electron microscopy and analysis 
1'(11) = (l/II!)(x/},yexp( -X/A) (2.7) 
Thus the probability of an electron undergoing exactly two scallering events 
with a mean free path A in a distance I is 1'(2) and is given by 
p(2) ~ (1/2)(1/»'ex p(-I/» 
Notice that 1'(0) is the probability of the electron not being scallered by this 
process and that I -1'(0) is therefore the probability of it being scallered once 
or more. 
The Poisson equation approach is not much use for multiple scallering, 
where all primary electrons can be assumed to be scallered very many times, 
possibly by several different mechanisms. In these cases other averaging 
approaches are more fruitful; one example, the Monte Carlo method, is illus­
tnlled in section 2.7. 
2.6 Elastic scattering 
Elastic scallering is defined as a process which. although it might change the 
direction of the primary electron, does not change its cnergy detectably. This 
type of scallering results from Coulombic interactions (i.e. involving electro­
static charges) between the primary electron and both the nucleus and all the 
electrons around it. This is known as Rutherford scallering and it gives rise to a 
strongly 'forward peaked" distribution of scallered electrons. If the energy of 
the primary electron is Eo, the probability 1'(0) of it being scallered through an 
angle 0 is given by 
1 
1'(0) ex ,. Eo S1l14 0 (2.8) 
The probability of a small angle of scalier is very much greater than that of a 
large angle. Notice too that the probability of scallering through any angle 
decreases as the energy of the electron increases. 
The mean free path for elastic scallering depends quite strongly on the 
atomic number of the scallering atom. To give an example for 100 kV 
electrons, A is about 5nm for gold (atomic number 2 =79) but about 150 
nm for carbon (2 = 6). 
Elastic scallering is important in electron microscopy because it is a major 
mechanism by which electrons are deflected and also because elastically 
scallered electrons are the main contributors to diffraction pallerns. Most of 
Chapter 3 thus refers implicitly to elastic scallering. The strength of scallering 
by an atom depends on its atomic number and is usually described in terms of 
its atomic scallering factor, f. This is defined as the amplitude of scallering 
from the atom divided by the amplitude of scallering from a single electron. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectrons and their interaction with the specimen 31 
2.7 Inelastic scattering 
Inelastic scallcring is a very general term which refers to any process which 
causes the primary electron to lose a detectable amount of energy, L1E. In terms 
of the facilities usually available to electron microscopists, L1E would need to 
be substantially more than 0·1 eV before it could be detected. There are many 
interaction processes which could cause energy to be lost by the primary 
electron and transferred to the electrons or atoms of the specimen. We will 
only consider four of the most probable types of scallering event. It is 
important to realize that the inelastic scallering processes (probably in combi­
nation) are eventually responsible for the stopping of an electron by a solid. 
Almost all of the kinetic energy which was carried by the primary electron will 
end up as heat in the specimen. A small proportion of the energy may escape as 
X-rays, light or secondary electrons and these may prove extremely useful for 
both imaging and analysis, as we show in Chapters 5 and 6. Secondary effects 
are dealt with in the next section; first let us consider the main types of inelastic 
scallering process. 
2.7.' Phonon scattering 
Phonons are the quanta of elastic waves, that is of atomic vibrations in a solid. 
A primary electron can lose energy by exciting a phonon and effectively heating 
the solid slightly. The amount of energy lost in doing this is rather small, 
generally less than I eV. and the mean free path for high energy electrons is 
quite large, of the order of 11m. These facts do not mean that phonon scallering 
is unimportant, for two main reasons. All electrons which remain in the solid 
are likely to excite phonons eventually, perhaps after they have lost larger 
amounts of energy by other means (see below) and this is how the solid is 
heated by the electron beam. Also, when phonon scallering occurs the 
scallered electron is generally deflected through quite a large angle, typically 
10 degrees. This will be significant in the discussion of image contrast in 
Chapter 4. 
2.7.2 Plasmon scattering 
A plasmon is a wave in the 'sea' of electrons in the conduction band of a metal. 
There are similar effects among the bonding electrons of non-metals. In 
exciting a plasmon the primary beam loses 5-30eV and the mean frce path 
for this event is short -a few hundred nm in most materials. Consequently 
plasmon scallering is a frequent occurrence in all electron-solid interactions. 
We shall sce in Chapter 6 that these energy losses dominate the 'energy loss 
spectrum' but are not very useful for analysis because the energy loss is not 
particularly characteristic of the scattering element. The Poisson equation (2.7) 
can be used to calculate how many plasmons an electron is likely to excite in 
traversing a thin specimen. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp32 Electron microscopy and analysis 
2,7.3 Single valence electron excitation 
It is possible, but less likely, that a primary electron will transfer some energy 
to a single valence electron rather than to the 'sca' eollectively. The mean free 
path for this process is quite large (~tm) , the energy loss is small (about leV) 
and the typical scallering angle is also small so the process is not exploited in 
electron microscopy. 
2,7.4 Inner shell excitation 
A rare but valuable form of inelastic scattering is the knocking out of an inner 
shell electron. Because the binding energy of such K and L shell electrons may 
be high the energy lost by the primary electron can be quite large. For example 
it takes 283 eV to remove a carbon K electron, 69508 eV to knock out a 
tungsten K and llOOeV to excitc a copper L. The mean frce path for this 
type of scallering is quite largc (~tm) , so the process occurs much less frcqucntly 
than, say, plasmon scallering. Howevcr the sccondary effects produced when 
the excitcd atom relaxes arc almost ideal for analysis, as the next section shows. 
The cross-section for inner shell excitation, in common with that for most 
scallcring processes, drops as the primary elcctron energy 1:."'0 increases. It is 
also lower for elements of highcr atomic number Z, since E, (thc critical energy 
to excite an X-ray) increases with Z and 
o IX I / 1:."-Eo (2.9) 
2,7.5 Inelastic scattering and absorption 
In all but the thinnest specimen it is elear that more than one of the inelastic 
scallering processes can take place. In a 'solid' specimen many such events will 
oecur until the electron is stopped or leaves by the surface it entered. The 
trajectories of a few typieal electrons, ealculated by a Monte Carlo method 
which introduces the anglcs of scallering with their appropriate probabilities, 
arc shown in Figure 2.6. It can be seen that thc majority of electrons are 
brought to a halt within thc solid but a few arc backscarterell and leave the 
specimen. The volume within which 95% or so of the primary electrons arc 
brought to rest is generally referred to as the interaction volllllle and will be 
discussed in greater detail in Chapters 5 and 6. An interactive Monte Carlo 
simulation is available in the MATTE R software module 'Electron Beam -
Specimen Interactions'. 
In the case of a solid specimen it is clear what is meant by absorption. For a 
thin specimen, through which many or most of the electrons are eventually 
transmilled, the term has to be defined very carefully. The geometry of an 
electron detection system is typically like that shown in Figure 2.7. By 
'absorbed' we mean 'not detected in our experiment' and for this geometry 
that means 'scallered through an angle greater than 0'. If the atomic 
zzzPsgiolePfrp1.7 11m 
Aluminium 13 
90 k eV 
o Degree; Electrons and their interaction with the specimen 33 
23 Incident Electrons 
3 BackSclrtlered 
13·0. " 
Figure 2.6 Electron trajector ies in aluminium calculated by a Monte Carlo procedure. Twenty 
three electrons are shown in this figure. of which three escape and are thus back­
scattered. 
Specimen 
, , , 
, '8 , , , , , Detecto , , , , 
Figure 2.7 The geometry of an electron detection system. Electrons which are deflected 
through an angle greater than 0 after passing through the specimen are nOl: regis­
tered by the detector and have thus effectively been 'absorbed' in this experiment. 
cross-section for scallering through 0 or morc is t1a thcn it is possible to 
dcscribe absorption using thc convcntional Lambcrt-Becr law. Thc equation is: 
1 I 10 = exp( -NCfaX) (2.10) 
This dcscribes the fractional intcnsity, 1 I 10 which remains aftcr absorption in a 
thiekncss x. N is the number of scallcring atoms per unit volume which is often 
eonvcnicntto write in terms of Avogadro's number, N,\, as N = NA piA where 
p is the dcnsity and A the atomic mass. 
Remcmber that all seallering mechanisms, elastic and inelastic, are strongly 
forward peaked so that the cross-scction which is appropriate in equation 2. \0 
will depend quite scnsitively on the angle 0 subtendcd by the dctector. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp34 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Primary 
""'m 
V 
{I 
Trammltted 
b."m B 
Figure 2.8 A summary of the effects which may be detected when a primary beam of high 
energy electrons hits a specimen. S = secondary electron s: B = backscattered elec­
trons: D = dtffracted elearons. 
2.8 Secondary effects 
A secondary effect can be loosely defined as an effect caused by the primary 
beam which can be detected outside the specimen. The secondary effects with 
which we will be mainly concerned arc either electrons or electromagnetic 
radiation. They are summarized in Figure 2.8. For the present purpose it is 
convenient to categorize them into five types which relate to the way in which 
each effect is exploited. 
2.8. I Secondary electrons 
This is not a very accurate term, but is used to describe those electrons which 
escape from the specimen with energies below about 50eV. They could con­
ceivably be primary elcctrons which at the very end of their trajectory (Figure 
2.6) reach the surface with a few eV remaining. However they are more likely to 
be electrons to which a small amount of energy has been transferred (by one of 
the processes outlined in section 2.7) within a short distance of the surface. The 
yield of secondary electrons, that is the number emitted per primary electron, 
can be as high as, or higher than, I. Secondary electrons arc therefore 
abundant and are the most commonly used imaging signal in scanning 
electron microscopy (Chapter 5). 
2.8.2 Backscattered electrons 
It has already been shown in Figure 2.6 that some primary electrons may leave 
the surface before giving up all their energy. It turns out that they arc most 
likely to do this while they still have a large fraction of their incident energy. 
Baekscattered electrons arc not usually as numerous as secondary electrons but 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectrons and their interaction with the specimen 35 
most of them carry high energies. They arc used for imaging, diffraction and 
analysis in the SEM (Chapter 5). 
2.8.3 Relaxation of excited atoms 
If a localized electron has been knocked out of an atom the atom is in an 
excited, high energy, state. At some later time the empty electron state will be 
filled and the atom will relax, giving off the excess energy as a secondary effect. 
There arc essentially three ways in which this relaxation can happen. If the 
vacant electron state is an outer state then the energy to be given off will be 
small and is commonly emitted in the form of a photon which may be in the 
visible range. This effect is known as cafhOllollllllillescellce. 
If on the other hand the vacant state is an inner state the amount of energy 
to be released is larger and there arc two main possibilities: a characteristic X­
ray or a characteristic (Auger) electron may be emitted. These two processes 
arc shown schematically in Figure 2.9. If an X-ray is to be emitted a single 
outer electron jumps into the inner shell vacancy (Figure 2.9(a». The energy of 
the X-ray is then the difference between the energies of the two excited states 
and this is characteristic of the particular atomic species. For example if a K 
shell electron has been knocked out of a molybdenum atom (Figure 2.1), and 
replaced by the 'jumping in' of an L electron the energy difference, 11£, is 
17400eV, which is emitted as the K" X-ray of Mo. The wavelength of this 
X-ray can be ealeulated from 
h, 
f...=-11£ 
(oj (2.(() 
(b) 
Figure 2.9 The two ways in which an inner-shell-excited atom can relax. In both cases a K shell 
electron has been knocked out -in (0) a characteristic (K,,) X-ray is emitted while 
in (b) an Auger electron (KLM) is ejected. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp36 Electron microscopy and analysis 
and in this case is 0·071 nm. If the vacancy had been filled by an M shell 
electron the energy difference would have been greater, 19600 eV, and the X­
ray emilled would have been the Mo K~, with a wavelength of 0·063 nm. These 
energies and wavelengths arc different for each atomic species and by 
measuring them we can determine which elements must have been present in 
the specimen. This is the basis of analytical electron microscopy and electron 
probe microanalysis (Chapter 6). 
Inspection of Table 2.1 would lead to the conclusion that there should be 
very many characteristic X-rays for each atom, since transitions between all the 
possible states for each atom would appear to be possible. However a set of 
selection rules prohibit many of the transitions, so that for instance a 2s 
electron cannot jump to fill a Is vacancy. The most useful X-rays arc listed 
in Chapter 6. 
It is possible for a primary electron to excite an X-ray without knocking out 
an inner shell electron. In this case the electron can lose any amount of energy 
(up to its IOta I kinetic energy) and the X-ray is no longer characteristic of a 
particular alOm. This process is called Bremsstrahlung (German for 'braking 
radiation ') and leads 10 a background of X-rays in any electron-generated X­
ray spectrum. Figure 2.10 shows a typical spectrum with both characteristic 
and Bremsstrahlung radiation. 
An alternative to X-ray emission is the ejection of an outer electron carrying 
the excess energy as kinetic energy. This process, known as Auger emission, is 
shown in Figure 2.9(b). Thrce electrons are now involved; the original vacancy, 
the outer electron which jumps into it and the other outer electron which leaves 
carrying the surplus energy. Measurement of the energy of the characteristic 
Auger electrons forms the basis of A1Iger electron spectroscopy. which is 
discussed in Chapter 7. 
Intensity 
(log scale) 
u L 
Molybdenum 
10 EnergylkeV 20 
Figure 2./0 An X-ray spectrum excited from a solid specimen of molybdenum by a beam of 
30keV electrons. The K and L characteristic peaks are evident, superimposed on 
the Bremsstrahlung background. Notice that the intensity scale is logarithmic so 
that the background intensity appears to be rather higher in comparison with the 
characteristic peaks than it is in reality. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectrons and their interaction with the specimen 37 
Intensity 
s 
A A B 
50eV Electron energy 
Figure 2.11 An idealized electron spectrum showing the relative abundance of secondary (5). 
Auger (A) and backscattered (B) electrons. Notice that the energy scale is not con­
tinuous: Eo is typically »50 eV. 
Auger electron and characteristic X-ray emission are alternative proeesses by 
which energy can be emitted as an exeited atom relaxes. The two processes do 
not. however, oecur with equal probability and the fraction of atoms which 
emits an X-ray, known as the fluorescence yield, varies strongly with atomic 
number. A simple expression for the X-ray fluorescence yield, II', is 
II' = Z4/(Z4 + c) 
Z is the atomic number and the eonstant c has a value of about 106 for atoms 
whose K shells have been excited and is larger for the Land M shells. The yield 
of Auger electrons is 1 -II'. A simple caleulation shows that from a light 
element (small Z) Auger electrons will be emitted in far larger numbers than 
X-rays while for heavy elements the situation is reversed. 
The relative abundance of the three types of electron emission (secondary , 
backscattered and Auger) is illustrated in Figure 2.11, which shows an idealized 
electron spectrum. There are large numbers of secondary and backscattered 
electrons but relatively few of the (analytically most useful) Auger electrons. 
The mechanisms of X-ray and Auger emission arc described graphically in 
the MATTE R module 'introduction to Electrons in Crystals'. This can be used 
to show dynamically the electrons sketched in Figure 2.9. 
2_9 The family of electron microscopes 
The ideas presented in this chapter contain all the clements needed to construct 
the whole family of electron microscopes. All instruments have an electron 
gun, a system of condenser lenses, and some SOrl of signal detector. Figure 
2.12 shows the way in which these and other components are put together to 
make the various types of EM which are in common use. Starting in the centre 
of the diagram, the SEM needs scanning coils and an electron detector, while 
zzzPsgiolePfrp38 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Go. 
"" coils 
, 
Detectors '=: <I , 
~i~ , , 
Specimen : === 
'1.'1 nil.""'. I 
'-' , 
<:>JeCD ' , , 
-: 
ACM (C)TEM , 
~i~ ~ , , , 
i I Iii I 
SEM EPMA STEM \1 
Analytical 
STEM 
Figure 2. / 2 The family of electron microscopes. The two basic imaging systems (SEM and TEM) 
are shown in the centre. The addition of further detectors or lenses can give each 
microscope a range of analytical capabilities. X = X-ray detector; E = electron 
detector. 
the TEM needs objective and projeclor lenses and a viewing screen. From lhese 
two basic arrangements all lhe other microscopes to be described in this book 
have developed. The SEM becomes a microprobe analyser (EPMA) when an 
X-ray deleelor is added, or a STEM when lhe detector is moved below the 
specimen. In a similar wayan X-ray deleelor and/or an eleelron energy loss 
spcetromeler (EELS) can be added to a TEM to make an analytical EM 
(AEM). Addilion of scanning coils to lhis configura lion results in a TEM/ 
STEM, while adding post-specimen lenses to a dediealed STEM al lhe other 
end of lhe diagram would achieve virtually the same configuralion. The two 
ends of Figure 2.12 therefore effectively meet. All lhe inslruments illuslrated in 
the figure arc described in more detail in laler chapters. 
2.10 Questions 
1 An electron beam of brighlness (B) 1010 Am-2 sr-1 is focused to a Spol of 
diameter 100 nm at the specimen. What is the currenl density (Acm-2) wilhin 
the spot and what is lhe dose rate in elcclrons per square nm per second? Take 
the convergence angle to be 0·04 rad. 
2 By considering lhe X-ray fluorescence yield for K shell excilalion deduce 
which element should givc almosl equal numbers of characlerislic X-rays and 
Auger eleclrons. 
3 What is the increase in mass (above lhe rest mass) of a 300 k V electron? 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectrons and their interaction with the specimen 39 
4 Would you expect the energy of an Auger peak to be higher, lower or the 
same as that of the equivalent X-ray peak? Explain why. 
S What fraction of electrons will not Ix: scattered in a thickness of lOOnm if the 
mean free path for all scattering is 80 nm? What fraction will Ix: scattered three 
times? [Usc the Poisson distribution on page 30] 
6 A detector set up as shown in Figure 2.6, subtending an angle 0·1 rad, detects 
90% of the electrons passing through the specimen. If the detector is replaced 
by a larger detector, subtending O· 2 rad, what fraction of the electrons should 
now be detected? Assume that the scattering has an angular dependence given 
by the Rutherford equation (2.8). 
7 Usc the de Broglie relationship to deduce the elTective wavelength of a pool 
ball of mass 0·1 kg travelling at 2ms-l. 
8 The electronic configuration of aluminium (atomic numlx:r 13) is 
Is2 2S2 2p6 3s2 3pl. What is the configuration of copper (atomic numlx:r 29)? 
9 Calculate the wavelength of an X-ray of energy 2166eV. Deduce from the 
table of w<tvelengths in Chapter 6 (Table 6.1) which elements it might have 
arisen from. 
\0 What advantages and disadvantages would you expect if the electron gun of a 
TEM w<ts 10000lted at the bottom of the column rather than in its usual 
position at the top? 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChapter 3 
Electron diffraction 
As we saw in the previous chapler, an electron beam which has passed through a 
thin specimen contains two components: elastically scattered electrons and inelas­
tically scattered electrons. From an analysis of the spatial distribution of the 
scattered electrons -known as an electron diffraction pattern, we can deduce a 
great deal of infonnation about the arrangement of the atoms in the specimen. 
Equation 2.8 shows thaI the intensity of clastic scattering (ff)} from a 
particular atom species is a maximum when the scattering angle (0) is zero 
and decreases monotonically as 0 increases. We might therefore expect that a 
diffraction pattern from a solid specimen would be somewhat similar. 
Figure 3.1(a) is a diffraction pattern from a thin film of amorphous carbon, 
and Figure 3. I (b) is a graph of intensity as a function of scallering angle. It is 
elear that although the intensity of the scallering docs generally decrease as 0 
increases, the variation of scalleroo intcnsity is more complex than equation 2.8 
would predict as there are some diffuse maxima in the intensity. As may be seen 
from Figures 3.I(e) and 3.I(d), the diffraction pallerns from crystalline 
materials arc even more complex. Although illdi)'idual atoms scalier 
according to equation 2.8, when the atoms arc close together, there is a 
strong interaction between the electrons seallered from different atoms. 
Therefore, in order to account for the diffraction pallerns from solids, we 
must look in some detail at the effccts of atomic arrangement on electron 
scallering. Although some information about the average atomic spacing in 
an amorphous material may be obtained from pallerns such as Figure 3.I(a), it 
is from crystalline materials that we can obtain the most information, and the 
rest of this chapter will deal exclusivcly with crystalline materials. 
The two parameters of importance in electron diffraction arc the aI/gular 
distribution of the scalleroo electrons and the intemit)' of the seallering. The 
geometry of electron diffraction pallerns is fairly simple, and from a knowledge 
of this we can deduce a great deal of information about the structure of a 
crystal and its orientation. A knowledge of the factors which determine the 
intensity of electron scallering enables us to derive more dctailed information 
from a diffraction pallern, and, perhaps more importantly , enables us to under­
stand and interpret the images of crystalline materials in the transmission 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 41 
/ , o , 
Scalt~ rin9 angle 
(a) (b) 
(e) (d) 
Figure J.I (a) Electron diffraction pattern obtained from a thin film of amorphous carbon. 
(b) The variation of intensity with scattering angle obtained from Figure 3.I(a). 
(c) Diffraction pattern from a fine grained polycrystalline gold specimen. 
(d) Diffraction pattern of a single crystal c:i aluminium. 
electron microscope, as will be discussed in Chapter 4. However, a detailed 
calculation of the intensity of diffraction is beyond the scope of this book, and 
we shall only look at this aspect of diffraction briefly. 
3.1 The geometry of electron diffraction 
3.1.' Bragg diffraction 
Let us first consider the interaction of an elcctron beam with a perfcct crystal in 
which all the atoms lie on a cubie lallice. A cross-section of a very thin 
zzzPsgiolePfrp42 Electron microscopy and analysis 
r 
• • • • d • e • • • • • • • • A • • • • • • • • • • " • • • 
'0 
T 
Figure 3.2 The scattering of an incident beam of electrons (I) by a crystalline specimen. Intense 
beams of electrons may emerge from the cd-.er side of the specimen undeviated (T) 
or having been diffracted (D) from atomic planes of spacing d. In other directions 
(e.g. N) no intense beams will be formed. 
specimcn of this material is shown in Figurc 3.2. Now if an electron beam is 
incident on this spccimen it will be elastically scallered by somc of thc con­
stitucnt atoms such as those marked A and B. We can think of the electron 
bcam as a wave motion (section 2.2) and apply a similar argument to that used 
to explain thc diffraction of light or X-rays. 
The incidcnt electron beam is locally cohcrent ; in other words, all the indi­
vidual electron waves are in phase. Any scallered waves which are also in phase 
with one anothcr will reinforce and lead to a strong beam of electrons, whercas 
any scallered waves which are out of phase will not reinforce. The scallered 
waves at D will be in phase if thc path lengths diffcr by an integral numbcr of 
wavelengths. This will be so ifCB + BE = III.., where II is an integer and A is the 
electron wavelength. However, it may be seen from Figure 3.2 that 
BE = cn = dsin 0, and hence thc condition for rcinforcement is 
2d sin 0 = 1/". (3. I ) 
This is well known as Bragg's law and it is widely applied to the diffraction of 
X-rays as well as electrons. It tells us that we can expect very few elastically 
scallered electrons to emergc from our spccimen unless they are at an angle 0 
which is a solution of equation 3.1. 
We need to consider the significance of d, /I and O. As may be seen from 
Figure 3.2, d is the spacing of the atoms which are scallering the electrons. 
In a crystalline array, d is therefore the spacing of the lines of atoms, or in a 
threc-dimensional crystal, thc spacing of planes of atoms -the interplallar 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 43 
spacing. In any crystal there will be many other planes which we can define, 
each of which will have its own interplanar spacing. 
In order to interpret real diffraction pallerns we need a formal system of 
defining planes and directions in the crystal, and we will use the standard Miller 
index 1I0tmioll, dctails of which may be found in any textbook dealing with 
elementary crystallography. Briefly, in this notation a direction in the crystal is 
denotcd by square brackcts, and is expresscd as three numbers (usually 
integcrs) which give the co-ordinates of the direction using the x, y and = 
axes of the unit cell, e.g. [110]. A plane in thc crystal is denoted by round 
brackets, and is again expresscd as three numbers which give the inverse of 
the distance along each crystal axis where the plane intercepts it, e.g. (110). 
Finally, since each strongly diffractcd beam can be associatcd with a particular 
set of crystal planes, diffracted beams are also indexed using M illcr indices, but 
in this case thcre are no brackets, e.g. 110. In all cases a negative numbcr is 
denotcd by a bar above, to save spacc, e.g. (110). Using this notation for a 
cubic crystal for example, the interplanar spacing of planes with the indices 
(lIk/) is given by 
d _ a 
Irk! -V ') ') ') 1,-+k-+1-( 3.2) 
where a is the length of an edge of the smallest cube which can be obtained with 
atoms at all corners (the IIIlit cell). The integer /I in equation 3.1 is the order of 
dijJraction, and for a particular plane, diffraction occurs when /I = I, 2, 3 ... 
etc. However, in electron diffraction it is conventional to consider only the first 
order of diffraction, i.e. /I = I, and to deal with higher orders by using the 
corresponding multiples of the Miller indices. Thus when dealing with the 
second order diffraction from a (131) plane, we imagine planes to be present 
with half the spacing and call this the first order diffraction from a (262) plane. 
Equation 3.1 is thcn wrillen as 
A=2dsinO. ( 3.3) 
Now let us consider the significance of the angle 0, the Bragg angle. Because of 
the very short wavelength of the electrons used in electron microscopy we can 
simplify equation 3.3 even further. If we substitute typical values of I. and d in 
equation 3.2, say A = 0·0037 nm (the value for 100kV electrons from Table 
2.2) and d = 0·4 nm (the spacing of some commonly oecurring planes in 
aluminium), we find that sinO = 0·0046 and 0 = 0·26° = 0·0046 radians. For 
such an angle, which is typical of electron diffraction, we can write sin 0 = 0, 
and hence equation 3.3 becomes: 
A ~ 2dO. (3.4) 
Since 0 is so smalL it is obvious that we have exaggerated the angles in Figure 
3.2 and that in practice, tI,ere will only be strong (/ijJraetioll from plalles of a101IJ.~ 
wlliell are almost parallel 10 the electron bealll. This makes the geometry of 
zzzPsgiolePfrp44 Electron microscopy and analysis 
electron diffraction pallerns much simpler than that of X-ray diffraction 
pallerns, for which 0 can be very large. 
3.'.2 The structure (actor 
Each type of plane in a crystal will have a different spacing and a different 
density of atoms per unit area, and so we may expect that the intensity of 
electron diffraction will be different for each type of plane. Although an 
aecurate theoretical value can be obtained using the theory of dynamical 
electron diffraction, this is beyond the scope of this book. A simpler model, 
the theory of kinematical electron diffraction, can be used as a rough guide and 
correctly predicts those planes in a crystal which give zero diffraetcd intcnsity. 
The amplitude of an electron beam diffraetcd from the (Ilk!) planes of a unit 
cell in the crystal is 
( 3.5) 
where AhH is the diffracted amplitude, Ao is the amplitude of the incident beam, 
and Fhkl is the strucf1lre factor for the (lIk/) planes. This structure factor is 
obtained simply by adding up the contribution to electron scallering made 
by each atom in the plane, taking into account the phase of each wave that 
is scallered. And sincc crystals arc periodic , this only has to be done for onc 
unit ccll of the crystal, not a complete speeimcn. Thc structure factor is given 
by the cquation 
Fi".:! = fl (0) cxp[ -2ni(l11/1 + kVI + IWI)] 
+ h(O) exp[-2ni(l11/2 + kV2 + 111'2)] 
+ ... 
+ fn(O) cxp[-2ni(ll1ln + kVn + hl"n)] 
where we count the atoms in the unit cell I, 2, 3, ... II, and the J'h atom has co­
ordinates (expressed as a fraction of the axes of the unit cell) Uj, Vj' II). The 
factor jj(O) is simply the seallering factor for the J'h atom, which gives the 
amplitude of scallering in the right direction from the atom, and the exponen­
tial factor keeps a track of the phase of each seallered wavelet. If there arc /I 
atoms in a unit cell, we obtain 
" 
firH = L jj(O) exp[-2rr.i(llllj + kVj + IwJ]. 
j,.,1 ( 3.6) 
In some cases, the individual terms can sum to zero, i.e. the planes give rise to 
no diffracted beam. These arc known as forhiddell reflections. As an example, 
consider the 100 reflection from a face-centred cubic (fcc) material such as gold. 
In this crystal structure, there arc atoms at each corner of the cubic unit cell 
and in the middle of each face, and the group of four atoms at [0, 0, 0], [0, ~,~], 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 45 
Tabld.1 The first 12 allowed reflections in the fcc crystal structure and their interplanar 
spacings 
Indices h2+k2+12 d/, Indice, h2+k2+e d/, Indices h2+k2+e d/, 
III ) 1//3 22l 12 1/lV2 4«) 12 1/4V2 
'00 4 Ip HI " 1/,fl9 531 lS 1/v'E 
22O 8 1/2,,/2 m 24 1/2V6 .. , l6 1/6 
)11 II 1/,;rr m 27 1/1,,13 53l 4l 1/J43 
H 0, !] and [!, !, 0] is the minimum set which describes the crystal completely. 
Using these four atoms in equation 3.6 gives 
1;;'k/ = /(0) exp[ -2ni( I ·0 + 0·0 + 0 ·0)] 
+exp[ -2ni( I ·0 + O.! + O.!)] 
+exp[ -2ni( I .! + 0·0 + O.!)] 
+cxp[ -2ni( I .! + O.! + 0 ·0)] ~J(O) exp[O] 
+exp[O] 
+exp[-ni] 
+exp[-ni] ~O 
( 3.7) 
The combination of the structure factor equation and Bragg's law allows the 
direction of all strongly diffracted beams from a crystal to be calculated. The 
struet life factor eq uation is often summarized in diffraction rules -for example 
in the case of an fcc crystal, only those planes with all even or all odd Miller 
indices give diffracted beams (Table 3.1). 
3, 1,3 Diffraction in the transmission electron microscope 
Electron diffraction patterns such as we arc considering arc normally obtained 
with a transmission electron microscope (TEM), an instrument which we will 
be considering in more detail in Chapter 4. The TEM can provide two separate 
kinds of information about a specimen -a magnified image, and a diffraction 
pattern. The way in which this comes about can be seen by examining the 
electron optics of a simple projection microscope. 
Figure 3.3 shows two sets ofparallcl rays leaving the specimen AA' in a two­
stage projection microscope. Before forming the first image at BB', all rays 
parallel to the two single-arrowed rays will pass through the point 0' and all 
rays parallel to the double arrowed rays will pass through D. For every set of 
parallel rays leaving the specimen there is a corresponding point in the plane 
DO' (known as the back focal plane of the objective lens). Similarly, if we 
follow the ray paths through the second (projector) lens we find that a second 
set of points is formed in the plane EE'. If we were to put a viewing scrcen at 
DO' or EE' instead of at ec' we would sec the diffraction pattern instead of the 
Image. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp46 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Di/futction 
patten, 
!nknnedi.tc 
'm"g~ :DifIractioo 
pattern 
Figure 3.3 The ray diagram of a two-stage projection microscope showing the positions of the 
diffraction pattern (DD' and EE') and image (BB' and eC). 
Incident bi.:o.m 
. 
u iJTracted bum , 
Undilfrnctcd be.. 
A • 0 
Figure 3.4 Schematic diagram showing the geometry of dtffraction pattern formation. 
In order to understand the geometry of electron diffraction, we can ignore 
the lens system, which merely magnifies the diffraction pattern, and consider 
the much simpler ray diagram of Figure 3.4. 
A beam of elcctrons impinges on a crystalline specimen. Some of the 
electrons pass through thc spccimen without interaction, and hit the screen 
which is at a distance L from the specimen, at O. Other electrons arc diffracted 
through an angle 20 by the crystal planes of spacing d, and these electrons hit 
the film at A, which is a distance r from O. From simple geometry, we sec that 
for small angles of diffraction , 
L ~ 20 (3.8) 
Combining this with equation 3.4, we find 
, ). 
L d' rd = LA (3.9) 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 47 
As the camera length L and the electron wavelength t. are independent of the 
specimen, and are a constant for the instrument, we call Lt. the camera 
comlallt. It can be seen that the distance of a diffraction spot from the undif­
fracted spo\, r, is therefore inversely proportional to the d spacing of the 
diffracting planes. If we know the camera constant for the instrument, then 
we can determine d simply by measuring r on the pallern. In a real microscope, 
because of the lenses between the specimen and the screen, Lis not the physical 
distance between the specimen and the screen, but is a notional distance which 
can be changed by the microscopist. 
3.2 Diffraction spot patterns 
In section 3.1.1 we showed that the planes of a crystal would diffract electrons 
if these planes were lying approximately parallel to the electron beam. Thus, as 
shown schematically in Figure 3.5(a), a single crystal specimen oriented such 
that several sets of planes are parallel to the beam will give rise to a diffraction 
pallern consisting of a regular array of spots. If the specimen contains several 
crystals of different orientations, as in Figure 3.5(b), then the diffraction 
pallern is the sum of the individual pallerns, and is more complicated. As 
shown in section 3.1.2 only certain crystal planes can diffract; this means 
that the number of possiblc (I spacings and hence r spacings on the pallern 
is limited, and the spots are not randomly distributed but fall on rings (each of 
which has constant r). 
• • • • • • • • •• , . • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • , •• • • • • • • • •• • • • • • • • • • • · , • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• , , • •• • • • • • • · , · , . • • • • • 
,oJ 
Figure 1.5 Types of diffraction pattern which arise from different specimen microstructures. (0) 
A single perfect crystal. (b) A small number of grains -notice that even with five 
grains the spots begin to form circles. (c) A large number of randomly oriented 
grains -the spots have now merged into rings. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp48 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 3.S(e) shows the ease for a specimen containing very many crystals of 
random orientation. In this situation, the spots on the rings are so close 
together that the rings appear continuous, and the diffraction pattern is of 
the type shown in Figure 3.I(e). 
In the discussion above, we have assumed that the diffraction pattern is 
obtained from the whole specimen, but in practice this is not the case. Either 
by using suitable apertures, or by illuminating only a small part of the 
specimen, it is possible to obtain a diffraction pattern from a very small 
region -such as just one grain in a polycrystalline sample, or a precipitate 
of one material lying in a matrix of another material. The way in which this is 
carried out in the transmission electron microscope is discussed in Chapter 4. 
In the following sections, the principles involved in solving diffraction 
patterns, and some examples of the type of information which is obtainable, 
arc discussed. There are many textbooks and handbooks available which will 
provide much more detailed information for those who wish to pursue the 
subject further. 
3.2.' Analysing diffraction potterns 
There are many reasons for wanting 10 analyse a diffraction pattern. It may be 
necessary to accurately measure the camera constant of the microscope, or to 
attempt to identify an unknown material using its interplanar spacings or 
diffraction geometry. Or a eertain diffraction condition may be needed to 
obtain a particular diffraction contrast image (see Chapter 4), or the exact 
orientation of the crystal needed to find out the habit plane of a particular 
type of defect. The accuracy and type of measurement made depend both on 
the specimen and the information required. 
The aecuraey of a TEM lallice spacing measurement is not as good as from 
modern X-ray techniques, because it is harder to measure the angle of diffrac­
tion to the same precision and very difficult to produce identical imaging 
conditions from sample to sample. The most accurate measurements are 
best made in conjunction with a standard of known lattice parameter. Both 
sample and standard must be accurately at eucentric height (sec section 4.1) 
when the two diffraction patterns are recorded, and no adjustments to diffrac­
tion focus or camera length made between the two exposures. Several 
computcr packagcs are now available which can measure the distance 
between spots or ring radii more accurately than can be achieved with a 
ruler (about 0.1%). Even without taking such elaborate precautions, it is 
possible to obtain interplanar spacings accurate to one or two percent, 
which is accurate enough for most purposes -such as comparing measured 
values with those of various candidate materials held in the JCPDS powder 
diffraction index of known crystalline materials. In what follows, we give 
examples of the most common types of measurement and describe typical 
procedures used to obtain the different kinds of information. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 49 
Camera constant calibration is most oftcn performed using a polycrystalline 
gold foil; such samples are easily prepared by evaporation of gold onto a very 
thin carbon or formvar film, and have a grain size small enough to give a 
continuous ring pattern such as Figure 3.I(e). Gold has the fcc crystal 
structure, with lattice parameter a = 0·4078 nm. The rings can be indexed 
aecording to Table 3.1. Since the radius of the ring r is inversely proportional 
to the plane spacing d, the innermost ring, III, has the largest plane spacing 
(0·2354 nm). Since d is known for each ring, a measurement of r gives the 
camera constant D. directly from equation 3.9. Checking that all the rings 
give the same value for the lattice parameter is a good way to check that the 
diffraction pattern is accurately in focus. 
A polycrystalline ring pattern from an unknown material is essentially 
similar to an X-ray Debye-Scherrer pattern, and is solved in a similar 
manner. It can provide information about the crystal structure and lattice 
spacing of the sample. As described in Section 3.1.2, only certain planes in a 
crystal will diffract electrons. It is relatively straightforward in the case of cubic 
materials to obtain the crystal type (i.e. primitive, body centred, or face 
centred) from the diffraction rules that apply (e.g. Table 3.1), and hence to 
index the rings simply by inspection. In most cases, information on the com­
position of the material can be used to reduce the problem from identifying a 
completely unknown compound to choosing betwcen a few known ones. The 
composition of the material is often determined in the TEM using energy 
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, as described in Chapter 6. The combination 
of diffraction and compositional information available in a TEM makes it a 
very powerful tool for the identification of unknown materials. 
Single crystal diffraction patterns arc often used to determine the crystal­
lographic orientation of the specimen in the microscope. This can be important 
when analysing crystallographic defects in the material, since it is nearly always 
necessary to obtain a particular diffraction condition (sec Chapter 4) to make 
the defects visible and to understand their nature. 
Starting with the pattern of Figure 3.1(d), from aluminium (ll = 0·405 nm), 
and with a camera constant of 1·46x 1O-12m2, one procedure is as follows. 
The table below shows the results obtained at each stage of the analysis: 
1'1 Ibl 1'1 1'1 1'1 
Measured r M easured Calculated General Particular 
values angle (1"1) d spacings indices indices 
Spot I 6·25 mm "'" 0·234 nm "' "' Spot 2 10·20 mm 0·'43nm 220 220 
(a) The r values for two diffraction spots dose to the centre of the diffraction 
pattern are measured. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp50 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Plane 2 •. 
Plane I 
Diffracting planes 
Undiffmcted h<:"rn 
'o;------'~ ----Co" 
o o 
S[IO! 2 
o o o 
Di/Trac\1(>n paUcm 
Figure 3.6 Schematic diagram of a diffraction pattern from a single crystal. 
(b) The angle Cl whieh the two spots subtend at the undiffraeted spot is measured 
(Figure 3.6). 
(c) If the camera constant is known, then dl and d2 arc detennined. 
(d) The indices of the diffraction spots arc determined from equation 3.5. We 
have only detenninLxlthe general nature of the indices, e.g. spot 2 in Figure 3.6 
is 220 type. We have not yet determined the particular indices, i.e. whether this ---- - --- ----spot is actually 220, 220, 220, 220, 202, 202, 202. 202. 022, 022, 022 or 022. 
(e) We have freedom to choose the particular indices of one spot. For example, 
we can take spot I to be Ill. Since, in this casc, the angle I:J. is 900 and the 
crystal system is cubic, we know that the vector dot product of the indices of 
the spots must be zero, and the indiL"Cs of spot 2 mLL"t thus add up to zero. - - - -- -This restricts the indiL"Cs of spot 2 to be one of 220,220,202 ,202,022, or 022. 
Once we choosc one of these directions, we have fixed the indexing of all 
subsequent diffraction pallems and crystallographic directions on images. 
In practice, there are a few trivial factors which can make consistent indexing 
of more than one diffraction pattern, or matching a diffraction pattern to an 
image, a confusing process. The first is the rotation of a diffraction pattern 
relative to its corresponding image. As described in section 2.4, the image 
produced by 11 magnetic lens is rotated relative to the sample. Since the lens 
currents in the microscope must differ when obtaining an image or a diffraction 
pallern, there will be a relative rotation. Furthermore, the image rotation will 
depend upon the magnification used, and the diffraction pallern rotation 
will depend upon the camera length used. Each microscope will usually have 
the relative rotations between image and diffraction pallern tabulated 
somewhere, but it is sound advice to pick a camera length and image 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 51 
magnification and stick to them whenever a self-consistent set of images and 
pallerns is necded. A second source of confusion is the difference between the 
recorded image and the view on the microscope screen. Film is placed in the 
microscope camera with its emulsion side up, facing the electron beam. It is 
then usually printed or scanned with its emulsion side down, towards the 
photographic paper or CCD array. This produces a print which is a mirror 
image of what the microscopist sees on the screen, and can make it hard to 
relate the notes made while on the microscope to the images in front of you. 
The important thing is to be aware of these simple pitfalls before you start, so 
that you can take the simple measures needed to deal with them. 
J.J Use ofthe reciprocal lattice in diffraction analysis 
Although, as we have seen in section 3.2, we can understand the principle of 
diffraction pallerns from simple geometry, if we wish to go deeper into the 
subject, and in particular to understand the intensity of electron diffraction, it 
is very convenient to discuss diffraction in terms of the reciprocal lattice. The 
concept of the reciprocal lallice is quite straightforward and is used widely in 
crystallography, diffraction and solid state physics, and comprehensive treat­
ments can be found in textbooks on these subjccts. 
Figure 3.7(a) shows part of a crystallalliec, a set of planes lying perpendicu­
lar to the paper. In the reciprocal lalliec, each plane of the real lalliec is 
represented by a point, lying a distance l/ll from the origin (0), on the per­
pendicular to the plane. The vector describing the position of the reciprocal 
lallicc point relative to 0 is often denoted by g, commonly known as the 
diffraction I'ecror. Therefore for the reallallice of Figure 3.7(a), the correspond­
ing reciprocal lallice is as shown in Figure 3.7(b). For a three-dimensional 
lallice, we can clearly construct a corresponding three-dimensional reciprocal 
lallice. 
If we apply the same transformation to the reciprocallallice, the reallallice 
is obtained once more. The equivalence of the two representations of the lattice 
i 1/d, 
d 
o • 
(" (b I • 
Figure 3.7 A two-dimensional representation of (a) a real lattice. and (b) the corresponding 
reciprocal lattice. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp52 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Beam 
Crystal 
ioJ 
0 0 • • c •• • •• •• 
L'Ud lid 
ibJ i<J 
Figure 3.8 The relationship between elearon diffraction and the re<:iprocallattice. (a) The crys­
tal, (b) the diffraction pattern, (c) the reciprocal lattice. 
m Figure 3.7 is shown by the fact that ihve know either the real or reciprocal 
lallicc, we can construct the other. 
In order to see why the reciprocallallicc should be of use in diffraction, let us 
first recall what we have learnt about electron diffraction. 
Diffraction occurs from planes which are approximately parallel to tIle electron 
beam (Figure 3.8(a)). 
The (Iiffraction paftefll consists of POiIlfS, spaced a distance proportional to 
l/ll, aligned in ti,e (Iirection perpendiclilar to tIle planes (Figure 3.8(b)). 
If we consider the lallice planes of Figure 3.8(0), then we can construct the 
reciprocallallice -Figure 3.8(c), and see that it is a row of points of spacing 
lid, lying perpendicular to the planes. Thus we see that there is a strong 
resemblance between the diffraction pallern and the reciprocal lallice. In fact 
the diffraction pallern is, to a first approximation, a scaled section through thc 
rcciprocal lallicc normal to thc beam. From cquation 3.6, wc see that thc 
scaling factor is LA, the camcra constant. 
Wc thercfore now have a powcrful way of constructing thc elcctron diffrac­
tion pallcrn for any known crystal. Wc simply have to construct the rcciprocal 
lallicc of the crystal, and we can obtain the diffraction pallern for any orienta­
tion of the crystal by orienting thc lallicc accordingly, and taking a section 
through it (rcmembering that diffraction rulcs will cause certain planes not to 
diffract). 
33.' The Ewald sphere construction 
The relationship between the reciprocallallice and the diffraction pallern can 
be demonstrated rather more formally by the Ewald spllere construction, which 
is shown in Figure 3.9. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 53 
A 
w. 
• • 
• • • • o .. 
....-----iIi • • • 
Figure 1.9 The Ewald sphere construction. 
(a) The diffracting crystal is rcprcscntLxi by its reciprocallatticc. 
(b) The electron beam is represented by a vector of length 1/1'., parallel to the 
beam direction, and tenninating at the origin of the reciprocal latticc. 
(c) A sphere (the Ewald, or rcl1ecting sphere) of mdius Ifl. is dmwn about A. 
As Figure 3.9 is drawn, the Ewald sphere passes through a reciprocal lattice 
point a distance lid from the origin. From geometry , we find that 
sinO= (l/l/)/2 =.!:. 
1/). 2d 
oc 
A=2dsinO 
i.e. Bragg's Law is satisfied by this construction. 
Thus we see that we can restate the conditions for diffraction as: diffraction 
occurs wI,en tIle Ewald sphere tOllches a reciprocallalfice poilll. 
Although this is not quite the same definition of diffraction as that which we 
deduced in the last section, the two statements are in practice equivalent for the 
diffraction of electrons by crystals, because the radius of the Ewald sphere is 
large (270 nm-l for 100 keV electrons) compared to reciprocal lattice vectors 
(typically about Snm-l). Therefore, to a first approximation, for small angles 
of diffraction, the Ewald sphere can be considered to be a plane. Thus, we sec 
zzzPsgiolePfrp54 Electron microscopy and analysis 
why a diffraction pallern can be considered to be a section through the recip­
rocal lallice, as we deduced previously. 
3.3.2 Diffraction from a ~nite crystal 
In order to understand some further features of diffraction pallerns, and also 
to understand the nature of TEM images of crystalline materials, we need to 
consider the case of a crystal which is not oriented exactly at the Bragg anglc. 
Figure 3.10 shows an Ewald sphere diagram for this situation, the reflecting 
sphere missing the reciprocal lallice point by a vector s. 
• 
• • 
• • o 
• • • , • • . ~ 
• • 
• 
Figure 3.10 The Ewald sphere diagram for a crystal oriented such that the reciprocal lattice 
misses the reflecting sphere by a vector s. 
On the basis of our considerations so far, we would predict that there would 
be no diffraction under these conditions because we have shown that diffrac­
tion only occurs whcn the rd1ccting spherc touches the reciprocal lallice. 
Howevcr, for real crystals, this condition can be relaxed, resulting in significant 
diffractcd intensity. 
If we makc the assumption that diffraction is weak, i.e. that the probability 
of any electron being diffracted is small, then the intcnsity of diffraction from a 
crystal of finite thickness may be calculatcd using the kinematical t{,eory of 
eleClron diffraction. 
Considcr an electron beam penetrating a specimen of thickness t as shown in 
Figure 3.11. The crystal is notionally divided into slices perpendicular to the 
electron beam, and the amplitude and phase of the elcctron scallcring are 
calculated for each slice. The intensity of scallcring from the crystal (/g) is 
then obtained by summing the scallering from each slice, taking into 
aecount phase differences of the waves scallered at different depths. It can be 
shown that the diffracted intensity is given by: 
_ (-,,-)2Sin2(lttS) 
I, _, ()'. 
~g ltS (3.\0) 
<;g is a constant of the material for a particular value of g, and is known as the 
extinction distancc. It is given by: 
ltV,. COSOB 
<;g = ").}.~ . (3.11) 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 55 
t 
,I -- Sp<.:cimen 
, ' .... Undiffracted Di n'racted 
beam heam 
Figure 3. / / Schematic diagram showing the path differences between electrons scattered at 
different depths in a crystal. 
lnknsity 
1/, 
o 
Deviation from Rragg angle 
Figure 3./2 The variation of dtffracted intensity with deviation from the Bragg angle for a 
crystal of thickness t. 
where V(, is the volume of the unit cell, "). is the electron wavelength, OB is the 
Bragg angle and Fy is the structure factor. The extinction distance is a crucially 
important parameter which determines many of the characteristics of images 
which rely on diffraction of electrons into or out of the image. For example, the 
amount of contrast at a particular thickness of the specimen, the apparent size 
ofa defect and the appearance of stacking fault fringes arc all determined by c,y. 
Figure 3.12 shows a graphic representation of the variation of diffracted 
intensity I with the deviation, s, from the Bragg angle, OB, for a specimen of 
constant thickness. 
We sec that this theory predicts that although the intensity of diffraction is a 
maximum at the Bragg angle (s = 0), there will be some diffraction when s is 
non-zero. The width of the main peak at half height is, as indicated on the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp56 Electron microscopy and analysis 
I 
I -~I 
I I 
Figure 3. I 3 The Ewald sphere construction for a thin crystal. 
(ll ) • • (h I 
• 
• • • 
• • • 
• • • • 
• 
• • 
(e) (<II 
, • -.\!,. 
• • • • 
• " • • • • • • 
• 
• 
J!.. • 
• I 
I 
I 
• 
• 
• • 
• 
• 
Figure 3.14 Electron diffraction patterns from a silicon crystal which is oriented such that the 
incident beam is parallel to a prominent zone axis [110]. The patterns (a) to (eI) are 
taken from progressively thicker regions of crystal. 
diagram, equal to 1/1. Therefore we sec that the thinner the crystal, the further 
the crystal may deviate from the Bragg condition and yet diffract. 
In terms of the Ewald sphere construction , we can represent this relaxation 
of the diffraction conditions for a thin crystal as shown in Figure 3.13 in which 
the reciprocal lattice points are now extended in a direction normal (0 (he plane 
of (he specimen . Comparing Figures 3.10 and 3.13, we find that the chances of 
the Ewald sphere touching the rods of the reciprocal lattice (i.e. of diffraction 
oecurring) are now increased. Since the length of the rods is inversely propor­
tionalto the specimen thickness, we sec that the thinner the specimen, the more 
diffraction spots will occur in the pattern. Figure 3.14 is a series of diffraction 
zzzPsgiolePfrp1'1,,1'11'1'1'1 I I I I I I' 
I I , I, I" " I I 
(., , I' I I' 
I, 1,',1'" "I 
(b) Electron diffraction 57 
Figure 3. / 5 Dtffraction from a specimen containing thin crystalline plates which are parallel to 
the electron beam. (a) Schematic representation of the specimen. (b) Streaked dif­
fraction pattern from an aluminium-<:opper alloy, heat treated to produce coherent 
plate-shaped particles (GP zones), which are oriented as shown in (a). 
patterns taken from the same wedge-shaped crystaL at different thicknesses, 
and clearly demonstrates the reduction in the number of diffraction spots as the 
specimen thickness increases. 
In a thin crystal, electron diffraction can oecur even if the specimen is tilted 
up to five degrees from the Bragg angle. This means that the orientation of a 
crystal can only be determined with an accuracy of a few degrees from spot 
patterns. Fortunately , there are other diffraction effects which allow much 
more aecuracy, i.e. convergent beam electron diffraction patterns and 
Kikuchi lines (see section 3.4). 
The idea of representing variations in electron diffraction conditions by 
placing a rod at each reciprocal lattice point can be generalized to deal with 
a crystal that is thin in any dimension. In this case, the diffraction condition at 
a reciprocal lattice point is extended in each dimension by an amount inversely 
proportional to the thickness of the crystal plane in that dimension. 
For example, for a plate-like erystal oriented parallel to the beam (Figure 
3. I S(a)), the reciprocal lattice points arc extended perpendicular to the beam, 
and the diffraction pattern -which is the interseetion of the Ewald sphere and 
the reciprocal lattice -will show streaking of the spots. An example of a 
diffraction pattern from a crystal of aluminium containing thin plate-like 
particles of a seeond phase oriented parallel 10 the beam is shown in Figure 
3. (S(b). 
zzzPsgiolePfrp58 Electron microscopy and analysis 
3.4 Other types of diffraction pattern 
Although spot diffraction pallerns of the type discussed above arc often the 
most commonly used, there are other diffraction effects which yield useful 
information. 
3.4.' Kikuchi line patterns 
As may be seen from Figure 3.14, as the crystal thickness increases, so does the 
diffuse background of the pallern, which is due to the inelastically scallered 
electrons. The intensity of inelastically scallered electrons depends upon the 
angle of scallering, and is a maximum in the forward direction as shown in 
Figure 3.16. In a crystalline specimen, some of these inelastically scallered 
electrons may subsequcntly be scallercd elastically, and it is this interaction 
which gives rise to Kikuchi lincs. 
In Figure 3.17(a) wc consider electrons which have been inelastically 
scallered at a point P in the specimen. Now some of these elcctrons will be 
travelling at thc Bragg angle (0) to planes Q and R, and may therefore undergo 
Bragg diffraction. Thus the inelastically scallered ray of intensity Is -which 
would havc gone to S -is now diffracted to T, and the inelastically scallercd 
ray of intcnsity Ir which would have gone to T is now diffracted to S. Thus the 
intensity of inc las tic scallering is modified from that predicted by Figure 3.16. 
At point S, the intensity is increased by IT -Is, and at point T, thc intensity 
is increased by Is -IT' As OS is less than OT, it follows from Figure 3.16 that 
Is is larger than J.r. Therefore there is a net decrease in intensity of inelastic 
scallering at S, and a net increase at T, as shown in Figure 3.17(b). In the 
two-dimensional diffraction pallern this effect appears as a pair of parallel 
lines, a dark one ("defect' line) at S. and a bright one ("excess' line) at T. 
Figure 3.18(a) shows an example of Kikuchi lines in an aluminium specimen. 
The angular separation of the lines is seen from Figure 3.17 to be 20, which is 
of course the same as the separation of the diffraction spots from the same 
planes. Diffraction spots and Kikuchi lines often occur in the same pallern, 
although the intensity of Kikuchi lines increases as the specimen thickness 
Intcnsity 
I 
o 
Scattering angle 
Figure 3.16 The intensity of inelastic scattering as a function of scattering angle. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpR 
, , 
1 
'. L , , 
, , Electron diffraction 59 
----~~f-~ s~,~,,~'"~,- .~---'c_~-- -----T 0 S 
(,) 
Intensity 
o 
Scattering angle 
(b) 
Figure J. / 7 (0) Ray diagram showing the geometry of Kikuchi lines (see text for details). (b) The 
intensity ci inelastic scattering when Kikuchi lines are produced. 
Illcrcases, and, as discussed above, the intensity of thc diffraction spots 
dccreases as the specimen thickness increases. Figure 3.18(b) shows an 
example of Kikuchi lines and diffraction spots. 
It may be scen from Figure 3.17 that the Kikuchi lines are symmctrically 
astride the diffracting plancs, and if the spccimen is tiltcd, then thc lincs will 
move as if they are rigidly fixed to the spccimen. For a small tilt cr, the lines will 
move a distance {) across the diffraction pattcrn, and from simple geometry it 
can be secn that {) = Lcr. For a typical camcra length of IOOcm, this mcans a 
shift of 30mm pcr degree of tilt. The position of Kikuchi lincs may be used to 
dctermine orientations to within a small fraction of a degree, and may also be 
used to mcasure small oricntation changcs within a specimen, such as across a 
low anglc grain boundary. Figures 3.18(b) and (c) show thc cffcct of a small tilt 
zzzPsgiolePfrp'ol 
,bl 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 61 
«) 
Figure 3. /8 (0) Kikuchi lines in an aluminium specimen. Note the pairs of parallel light and dark 
lines such as AA' and BB'. (b) Dtffraction pattern showing Kikuchi lines and diffrac­
tion spots in an aluminium specimen. (c) Diffraction pattern of the same sample 
after tilting the specimen by approx. 1°. By identifying a particular diffraction 
spot, such as 0, and a particular intersection of Kikuchi lines (e.g. X), it can be 
seen that this small tilt has caused a considerable shift of the Kikuchi line pattern 
relative to the spot pattern. 
on the diffraction pattern. Note that although the Kikuchi lines move across 
the pattern during tilting, the position of the diffraction spots remains fIXed. 
3.4.2 Convergent beam electron diffraction (C8ED) patterns 
The spot diffraction patterns discussed earlier in this chapter arc normally 
obtained with a parallel beam of electrons illuminating the specimen. 
However, if a convergent electron beam is focused on the specimen, then, as 
shown in Figure 3.19, the diffraction spots become discs, and from an analysis 
of their fine structure it is possible to obtain information about the specimen 
thickness, crystal structure and lattice parameters. 
The quality of the pattern is best if the diffracting region is of uniform 
thickness and orientation and is free of defects. Therefore only a small 
portion of the specimen, of a diameter no more than a few tens of nm, is 
generally illuminated. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp62 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Specimen \ ! Conveq;Ol1l kam 
, I 
\ ' , I 
"~~ 
1 "" , ' , ' I I 
Objecti,". __ -H-__ 
lens \ ---1-~--7--­,\ I I 
D""~10" ili~\ "" I / / 
Figure 3. /9 Ray diagram for convergent beam diffraction. 
The usc of such a small probe size makes the tcchnique very suitable for 
the study of small particles, and, as a crystallographic tool, it complements X­
ray methods which can obtain similar information, but only from large 
samples. 
In section 3.3.1 we interpreted the diffraction pallern as being a section 
through the rcciprocal lalliee, and showed that we could ignore the 
curvature of the Ewald sphere. However, for relatively large angles of diffrac­
tion this is not the case. In Figure 3.20 we sec that the sphere will intersect other 
layers of the reciprocal lallice and, if the collection angle is sufficiently large, 
this will result in corresponding rings of diffraction spots, known as Iligher 
order Laue :olle (or HOLZ) rings. 
The importance of these zones is that they provide information about the 
crystal in the direction parallel to the electron beam, in addition to the two­
dimensional information obtainable from the zero order Laue zone, which is 
the one used for normal spot pallerns. 
An example of a CBED pallcrn showing several HOLZ rings is shown in 
Figure 3.21. 
Whcn highcr ordcr Laue zones arc excited, fine lines due to diffraction from 
the highcr order Laue zones arc gcnerally seen within the diffraction discs as 
shown in Figure 3.22. These HOLZ lines arc formed in a very similar manner 
to Kikuchi lines (Figure 3.17), and their position is very sensitive to the crystal 
lallice parameter. They can be used to measure relative or absolute lallice 
parameters, the laller to an accuracy of I part in 104, and hence determine 
indirectly local lallice strains or changes in chemical composition. However 
caution must always be exercised since the lallice parameters of a thin specimen 
may be slightly different from those of a bulk specimcn, especially if therc is 
internal strain in thc specimen. 
From the overall symmetry of CBED pallerns obtained by aligning the 
incident electron beam along several prominent crystallographic directions -
often referred to as :olle axes -it is possible to obtain the point and space 
zzzPsgiolePfrp·:-~·'-:-~·~:·-.~· __ ·~l·~:·~:·-c:·-;·'-:--:·~ . • • • • • • • • • • o 
(,' 
• • • • • • • • • • • • 
• • • 
• • • 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
• • ·ct • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
• • • • 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
(b, 
Figure 3.20 ('I Intersection of higher order Laue zones by the Ewald sphere. (b) Schematic 
representation of the resulting d tffraction pattern. 
- • · , 
/ , , 
• • " , .". II • •• • 1 ". .' , ., ." " \ .. " / 
• • 
• 
Figure 3.21 Convergent beam diffraction pattern from a [III] oriented gamma prime particle 
in a nickel-base supera!loy. The pattern shows the diffraction discs of the zero 
order Laue zone. and also excitation of higher order Laue zones (HOLZ rings). 
(Yang-pi-Lin, University of Bristol.) 
zzzPsgiolePfrp64 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 3.22 Part of a convergent beam diffraction pattern showing the [I III bright field disc of 
silicon. The dark lines crossing the disc are HOLZ lines. whose positions are very 
sensitive to the lattice parameter of the specimen (yang-pi-Lin. University of 
Bristol). 
groups of the crystal. For this type of work it is often useful to compare the 
patterns obtained with those from known structures, and compilations of 
CBED symmetries for this purpose are available. 
CBED patterns can also be used to measure important parameters such as 
the operating voltage of the microscope and the specimen thickness. The latter 
is described further in section 4.2. 
3.5 Questions 
I Draw (a) The Ewald sphere construction, and (b) the unddlected and 
diffracted electron Ix:ams and the operating planes, when planes characterized 
by the reciprocal lattice vectors g, 2g and 3g lie in the Bragg condition. 
2 What is the Bragg angle for first order and second order diffraction from 
planes with d = 0·08934 nm and electron wavelength 0·00164 nm (aecclenll­
ing voltage = 400 k V). 
3 What do you expect to happen to an electron diffraction pattern as the 
accelerating voltage is increased? 
4 What are the five lowest-index diffracting planes for (a) a primitive cubic 
crystal? (atom position = [0 0 OD, and (b) a body centred cubic crystal? (atom 
positions = [0 0 0], [0· 5 0·5 O· 5]. 
5 The sum of the indiL"Cs of the spots in a diffraction pattern taken with the 
incident electron beam parallel to [III] direction in an fec crystal must add up 
to zero. (a) What are the indices of the spots closest to the undeflected beam? 
(b) If the distance between the spots is 12mm and the camera constant is 
1·8 x 10-12m2, what is the lattice parameter of the material? 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron diffraction 65 
6 How would you obtain an electron diffraction pattern from one grain in a 
polycrystalline specimen if the average grain size is (a) 5 11m (b) 20 nm? 
7 Your microscope has a severe contamination problcm which results in the 
deposition of an amorphous organic film on thc sp::cimen in areas illuminated 
by the electron ocam. How would this manifest itself in a diffraction pattern 
over time? 
8 If you can sec a shirl of O· I mm in thc position of a Kikuchi linc on your 
microscope screen, how accurately can you align a specimen to a givcn 
crystallographic direction using a camcra length of 46cm? 
9 How do thc HQLZ rings of a diffraction pattcrn obtained using selected arca 
diffraction differ from those obtained using convergcnt ocam diffraction? 
10 What is thc radius of the first I-IQLZ ring for a material with planar spacing 
(parallel to the ocam) 0·0600 nm and a camera wnstant of 3·0 x 10-12 m2? 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChapter 4 
The transmission electron 
• microscope 
4.1 The instrum ent 
In Chapler 2 most of the essential parIs of a TEM were described. The 
illumination is provided by an electron gun while the lenses arc all electro­
magnetic and work as described in section 2.4. The remaining necessary com­
ponents arc 11 viewing screen -usually a simple layer of electron-fluorescent 
material, viewed through 11 lead glass window -and a camera, which muSI 
work in the vacuum within the microscope. These components arc assembled 
into a vertical 'microscope column' of which 11 Iypical example is shown in 
Figure 4.1. Mosl of the thickness of the column is taken up with the windings 
of the lens coils, the polc pieces, and pipes of cooling water -the electrons 
figure 4.1 A modern transmission electron microscope. (Courtesy of Professor A. G. Cullis) 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 67 
travel down a fine tube in the eentre which rarely exeeeds a millimetre or so in 
diameter. 
Early microscopes generally used one cOlldellSer lens as a collimator to 
control the electron beam before it reached the specimen, and one or two 
objeclil'e and projeclOr lenses to magnify the subsequent image. They were 
therefore exact electron-optical analogues of Figure 1.4(a). Nowaday s it is 
more common to find two condenser lenses and four or five projector lenses. 
The electronics needed to control the electron gun, six or seven lenses and 
alignment coils is quite complex and the microscope shown in Figure 4.1 is a 
mass of knobs and dials. However, once the optical principles are understood 
even the most sophisticated TEM is very simple to operate. There is a tendency 
for modern microscopes to be controlled by a built-in computer and this results 
in a reduction in the number of visible controls. However it does not affect the 
optics of the microscope or the number of parameter s which must, explicitly or 
implicitly , be controlled. 
We will now examine a modern microscope in more detail, using the instru­
ment shown in Figure 4.1 as an example. 
4.1.1 The electron gun 
At the top of the instrument, about a metre above the seated operator's head, is 
the electron gun. The most common types of TEM have thermionic guns 
(section 2.3) capable of accelerating the electrons through a selected 
potential difference in the range 40-200 kV. The appropriate electron energy 
depends upon the nature of the specimen and the information required. For 
some applications, particularly if the specimen is relatively thick or very high 
resolution is required, it is an advantage to use much higher electron energies. 
A range of medi1lm mIlage (300-400 k V) and {/ig{/ I'olwge (600-3000 k V) micro­
scopes have been developed for these purposes. The very high energy 
microscopes have become rarer as the resolution of lower energy microscopes 
has improved through better lens design and as specimen preparation tech­
niques have developed. Furthermore, field emission guns have now developed 
to the point that very fine electron beams can be produced (of the order of 1 nm 
at the specimen) and they are becoming increasingly widespread. 
4.1.2 The condenser system 
Below the electron gun are two or more condenser lenses. Together, they 
demagnify the beam emitted by the gun and control its diameter as it hits 
the specimen (Figure 4.2). This enables the operator to control the area of 
the specimen which is hit by the beam and thus the intensity of illumination. 
An aperture is present between the condenser lenses (the cOlldellSer aperfllre) 
which can be used to control the convergence angle. AI their simplest the 
condenser controls can be thought of as brightness controls but in fact they 
zzzPsgiolePfrp68 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 4.2 A beam coming to focus just after the specimen ('underfocused') illuminates an area 
ci diameter d. The beam convergence is (;1. 
permit a wide range of eontrol over the region of speeimen which is 'sampled' 
by the beam and over the type of diffraction pattern which is formed (section 
3.4). It is useful to consider the widely used two-condenser illumination system 
in more detail. The first condenser lens (CI), often labelled SpOf si=e, sets the 
demagnification of the gun crossover (section 2.3). The second lens (C2, often 
intensify) provides control of the convergence angle of the beam leaving the 
condenser assembly , as Figure 4.3 shows. A parallel beam will illuminate a 
large area of the specimen (rays (i)); as the convergence angle is increased, the 
beam diameter at the specimen decreases until it reaches its minimum (rays 
(ii)), when the beam is focused on the specimen. As the convergence angle is 
increased still further, the beam focus is Ix:fore the specimen and the illumi­
nated area increases once more (rays (iii)). 
The minimum possible illuminated area is controlled by the effective size of 
the source at the gun, the strength of CI and the condenser aperture. It cannot 
of course be made any smaller than the limit imposed by diffraction at the 
condenser aperture and by aberrations in the condenser system. 
When the beam is focused on the specimen, its convergence angle is con­
trolled by the condenser aperture. The size of the condenser aperture also 
affects image quality, since the electrons which pass far from the optic axis 
will be strongly affected by spherical aberration (sec Chapter I). It also has a 
large effect on the intensity of the electron beam. The illumination provided by 
the condenser lens must be varied by the microscopist according to the kind of 
information he is trying to capture. As in most things, a balance must be 
sought to get the best result. Thus a diffraction contrast image is usually 
taken with a medium size condenser aperture, and fairly large spot size to 
maximize illumination (but not so large as to degrade image quality), and a 
close to parallel beam, to give even illumination and similar diffraction con­
ditions (but sufficiently intense to avoid very long exposure times, which could 
cause problems due to specimen drift). Alternatively. a convergent beam 
zzzPsgiolePfrpCl 
Condenser 
aperlure __ ~ 
C2 
, , , 
Specimen! 
I ' , 
I ' The transmission electron microscope 69 
G 5', 
, 
, 
" I , I , , I 
(ii)(iii)(i) 
Figure 4.1 The two-lens condenser system. The spot of size Sl at the gun crossover (G) is de­
magnified to S1 by the first condenser lens CI. The second condenser lens C2 is 
used to focus the beam: it may also change the spot size to Sl. (i). (ii) and (iii) show un­
denocused. focused and ovenocused beams respectively. The convergence angle t:I 
is controlled by the condenser aperture. An animated version ci this diagram can 
be found in MATTER: Introduction to electron microscopes. 
elcctron diffraction (CBED) pattcrn would need a small spot sizc (to rcducc thc 
effects of bending and defects in the sample), a large condenser aperture (to 
give a large disk in thc CBED pattern) and the beam focused accurately onto 
the specimcn using C2. 
The MATTER software module "The TEM' includes a model of a two­
condenscr systcm in which the strength of each lens can be varied indepcn­
dently and the effect on spot sizc and convergence can be observed. 
4.1.3 The specimen chamber 
Below thc condenser lics the specimen chamber, which is onc of the most 
crucial parts of the microscope. A very small specimen must be held III 
prccisely the correct position inside thc objcctive lens, but should also be 
zzzPsgiolePfrp70 Electron microscopy and analysis 
(. ) 
(0) 
x 
tilt 1 
«) tilt 2 
Figure 4.4 (a) A side entry double tilt holder. (b) A higher magnification view of the specimen 
cups. (c) The range of movements and tilts available with such a specimen holder. 
An animated diagram showing the effect ci specimen tilt when the sample does not 
lie at the eucentric height is shown in MATTER: Introduction to electron micro­
=p"'. 
capable of bcing movcd several millimetres and tilted by large angles. 
Additionally, X-rays must be permilled to leave the area if the microscope is 
to bc used in an analytical modc. These constraints are usually met by a side­
entry specimen rod (e.g. Figure 4.4) which holds a 3 mm diameter specimen (or 
a smaller specimen on a 3 mm support grid) between the pole pieces of the 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 71 
objeetive lens. The speeimen rod enters the column through an airlock, and can 
usually be moved up to 2 mm in the x and y directions to locate the region of 
interest. and by a fraction of a millimetre in the: direction, in order to bring it 
to the object plane of the lens. It isquite easy to tilt the specimen about the long 
axis of the holdcr by up to 60 degrees by rotating the holdcr itself. Tilt about an 
axis perpendicular to this is also vcry desirable but is achieved with more 
difficulty. The mechanisms which provide allthesc movements and tilts must 
ensure that whcn the appropriate specimen position has been sclected it does 
not move by more than about 0·1 nm or less while the micrograph is exposcd 
(dcpending upon the magnification and type of image). A movement of 0·1 nm 
in I sccond is equivalent to I mm in four months -the specimen must elearly be 
extremely stable. 
An important considcration is that the specimen does not move laterally 
when it is tilted. This can only be true if the axis of tilt accurately intercepts 
the optical axis of thc microscope. along which thc beam is travelling. It is 
possible to adjust most specimen holders so that one tilt is in this eucentric 
position. but normally it is not possible to also make the second axis of tilt 
eucentric. This means that it may be necessary to usc considerable skill to set 
up some of the diffraction conditions described in Chapter 3 and later in this 
chapter. 
4.1.4 The objective and intermediate lenses 
The objective lens is so strong that the specimcn sits within its pole pieces. The 
role of the objective lens is to form the first intermediate image and diffraction 
pattern, one or other of which is enlarged by the subsequent projector lenses 
and displayed on the viewing screen. 
The optics of the objective lens are shown in Figure 4.5. As has been 
emphasized in Chapter 3. a diffraction pattern is inevitably formed in the 
back focal plane of the lens. The first projector lens (often called the inter­
mediate or diffraction lens) can usually be switched between two scttings. 
shown in Figure 4.5(a) and (b). In the image mode, it is focused on the 
image plane of the objective (Figure 4.5(a». The magnification of the final 
image on the microscope screen is thcn controlled by the strength of the 
remaining projector lenscs (not shown in Figure 4.5). In the diffraction mode 
the intermediate lens is focused on the back focal plane of the objective (Figure 
4.5(b» and the diffraction pattern is projected onto the viewing screen. The 
magnification of the diffraction pattern is controlled by the projector lenses and 
is usually described in terms of the effective camera lellgtfl of the system. 
An essential feature of the objective system is the aperture holder which 
enables anyone of thrce or four small apertures to be inserted into 
the column in the back focal plane. The objective aperture elearly defines the 
angular range of scattered electrons which can travel further down the column 
and contribute to the image. Its diameter thercfore controls the ultimate 
zzzPsgiolePfrp72 Electron microscopy and analysis 
"l Specimen 
Objcctive 
lens 
Back focal plane 
Intermed iate 
10m 
• 
,bl 
Figure 4.5 The objective and first intermediate lenses. The objective lens is focused on the speci­
men and forms an intermediate image as shown in (a). In imaging modes (a) the 
intermediate lens magnifies this image further and passes it to the projector lenses 
for display. In order to make the diffraction pattern visible (b). the intermediate 
lens is refocused on the back focal plane of the objective lens and the diffraction pat­
tern is passed to the projector system. An animated version of this diagram together 
with a ray diagram can be found in MA TIER: Introduction to electron microscopes. 
resolution set by equation 1.7 and for high resolution a large aperture will be 
needed. A modern 200 kV microscope, with a spherical aberration coefficient 
c." of \ ·2 mm, might show a resolution of 0·2 nm with an aperture of half-angle 
4·5 x 10-3 radians (about a quarter of a degree). 
However, for many purposes the highest resolution is not needed and the 
objective aperture serves a different function in controlling the contrast which 
will be seen in the image. In section 4.2 we consider the main contrast mech­
anisms available in a TEM. 
4.'.5 The projector system -images 
The first image produced by the objective lens usually has a magnification of 
50-\00 times. This is further magnified by a series of intermediate and projector 
lenses and is finally projected onto the fluorescent screen. By using three or 
four lenses, each providing a magnification of up to twenty times, a total 
magnification of up to one million is easily achieved. It is not necessary to 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 73 
Figure 4.6 A convergent beam electron dtffraction (CBED) pattern from relatively thick Si. 
taken with the incident beam along the [I 10] axis. Inelastic scattering gives a diffuse 
background and loss of contrast in the unfiltered image (left). An energy filter. 
tuned to accept only electrons which have been elastically scattered (zero energy 
loss electrons). removes this effect and gives a far dearer image (right). (Courtes y 
ci C. B. Boothroyd. University of Cambridge) 
use all the lenses to achieve a low magnification and in this case one or more 
projector lenses will be switched off. 
Some specialized microscopes have an energy filter below the specimen, 
which can be tuned to allow the passage of only elastically scallered 
electrons or electrons which have suffered a particular energy loss. This has 
distinct advantages in, for example, high resolution electron microscopy (sec 
section 4.2.4), since inelastic scallering degrades image quality. It is also useful 
in the quantitative interpretation of diffraction pattern intensities, since there is 
always a diffuse background of inelastically scattered electron intensity in an 
unfiltered diffraction pattern. Energy filters can also be deployed below the 
camera as part of an electron energy loss spectrometer. They can give 
dramatic improvements in the quality of images and diffraction patterns, es­
pecially from thick specimens where inelastic scattering effects arc significant 
(Figure 4.6). 
4.1.6 The projector system -diffroction patterns 
It is often useful to examine or record the diffraction pattern from a selected 
area of the specimen. There arc two fundamentally different ways of doing this. 
In the selectetl area diffraction technique, an area of specimen (usually circular) 
is selected, although a larger area is being illuminated. In the alternative 
cOlllwgellf helml diffraction (also known as micrmlifj"ra clioll) technique the 
beam is condensed into a small spot so that the diffraction pattern comes 
from the whole of the (small) illuminated area. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp74 Electron microscopy and analysis 
s 
Figure 4.7 A selected area aperture A which selects a large area L in the intermediate image is 
optically equivalent to selecting the much sma!!er area S at the specimen. 
Selected area diffraction eould be achieved by inserting an aperture in the 
plane of either the specimen itself or the first image produced by the objective 
lens. The first of these is mechanically almost impossible while the second 
would require a very small aperture which is difficult to make, position and 
keep elean. The usual solution is to select the area using an aperture lower 
down the column, in the plane of the later intermcdiate images. In this way a 
much larger aperture can be used. For example if used in the plane of an 
intermediate image with magnification 200 x, a 200~lm diameter aperture 
will select a region only 111m across. Figure 4.7 shows that selecting the area 
in an intermediate image is optically equivalent to selecting the smaller area at 
the specimen plane. The aperture used for this purpose is called the selectel/ 
area aperfllre, or more loosely, the diffraction aperfllre. It is only useful to select 
an area O·S-I ~lm in diameter since one of the effects of spherical aberration is 
that electrons passing through the specimen as much as 1-4 ~lm outside the 
selected region may contribute to the diffraction pattern (depending upon the 
spherical aberration of the microscope). This is a small error if the selected 
region is SO 11m in diameter , but becomes the dominant feature if the selected 
area is only 1 ~lm in diameter. 
The only way to obtain a good diffraction pattern from a region smaller than 
about 1 ~lm in diameter is to usc the convergent beam diffraction tcchnique (see 
section 3.4.2). In this case, the diameter selected is the same as the diameter of 
the beam at the specimen, which is controlled by the condenser lens system. In 
a modern microscope it may be possible to focus the electron beam (and hence 
selected areas) down to 1 or 2nm in diameter, although in oldcr instruments 
the limit may be as high as 100nm. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 75 
4.1.7 The camera 
Traditionally the camera has simply been a means of introducing a sheet of fine 
grain photographic film under the viewing screen, and a shutler mechanism 
(usually in the microscope column) to expose it. As described in section 1.7, the 
depth of focus is very large in a TEM due to the high magnifications used, and 
there is ample space for a variety of image capture systems which can be 
introduced at different positions under the viewing screen. With the increase 
in the availability and sophistication of digital imaging technology, charge­
coupled device (CCO) array cameras arc becoming more widespread. The 
simplest digital cameras simply use a computer-based video system directed 
at a phosphor screen. These have limitations due to the low light level from a 
phosphor screen and their video-standard resolution. Much more sophisticated 
cameras are also a vailable which can capture images thousands of pixels wide. 
These cameras also measure the light from a phosphor screen, but in this case 
the light is channelled onto the CCO by a block of optical fibre. The CCO 
array is often cooled to reduce noise and longer exposure times arc possible. 
Also. by combining the output from such a camera with a computer which has 
image proeessing software and control of the microscope lenses, it is now 
possible to perform some alignment procedures quickly and automatically. 
4. 1.8 Below the camera 
Many analytical microscopes have electron detectors below the camera. These 
may be scintillation counters. which give an output proportional to the beam 
current and so can be used for STEM imaging (sec section 4.4), or electron 
energy loss spectrometers, which give information about the effects the 
electrons have suffered on their passage through the specimen (see section 
6.6), and in some cases allow energy-filtered images to be obtained (e.g. 
Figure 4.6). 
4.1.9 Alignment 
One of the most important aspects of good electron microscopy is the 
alignment of the electron beam along the optical axis of each lens. It is only 
if this alignment is accurate that the aberrations discussed in Chapter I ean be 
minimized and the potential resolution of the microscope realized. Clearly the 
eleetromagnetie lenses must themselves have been mechanically well aligned, 
and this will have been done by the manufacturer. However, there is always the 
need for minor adjustments, which arc performed by the operator using small 
electromagnetic deflection coils placed at strategic points in the column. 
Alignment procedures differ from microscope to microscope but arc always 
aimed at making sure that the beam is directed along the optical axis, particu­
larly in the sensitive region ncar the objective lens. Further coils permit small 
zzzPsgiolePfrp76 Electron microscopy and analysis 
fields 10 be imposed to correet for the effect of astigmatism in the condenscr, 
objective and projector systems. All these adjustments need to be made by the 
operator before he or she attempts to take high magnification micrographs. 
The details of the procedures are beyond the scope of this book but can be 
found in textbooks such as that by Williams and Carter (1996). 
4.2 Contrast mechanisms 
All our discussion of light microscopy and TEM has so far been in terms of 
geomelrical optics. Ray diagrams have been used to show that if there is an 
object (the specimen) in a certain plane, there will be a corresponding image at 
another plane. The viewing screen or camera is placed in the image plane and 
does not have to be positioned very precisely because the depth of focus is 
usually very large (section 1.7). Geometrical optics is very useful for consider­
ing the magnification, depth offield and focal conditions of a microscope but is 
virtually useless for interpreting the resultant image. For this purpose we must 
consider in detail the possible contrast mechanisms which will determine 
whether a feature will appear bright or dark in an image. 
There are three basie contrast mechanisms , one, two or all three of which 
may contribute strongly to the appearance of a TEM image. In each case the 
important consideration is that the final image can only be formed using those 
electrons which pass through the objective aperture shown in Figure 4.5. 
Electrons stopped by the aperture will not contribute to the image. Clearly 
the size and position of the objective aperture are crucial in determining the 
nature of the contrast seen in the image, and this will be evident as we consider 
each mechanism in turn. 
4.2.1 Mass-thickne ss contrast 
If a specimen is thin enough to form a useful image in the TEM we can 
assume that, except for a few which arc backscattered, primary electrons 
which enter the top of the specimen will emerge from the bottom. 
However, their angular range and energy spread will have been affected by 
clastic and inelastic scattering within thc specimen. Thc effcct of an aperture 
in thc back focal planc of thc objcctive lens is thus to stop all electrons which 
have been scattered, by any mechanism, through an angle greater than I:J. in 
Figure 4.8. If the aperture is centred about the optical axis, as shown in 
Figure 4.8, then in the absence of a specimen a bright background is seen. 
This is known as brigflf field imaging. Regions of specimcn which are thicker, 
or of highcr density, will scatter more strongly (i.e. more electrons will be 
deflected through an angle greater than cr) and will appear darker in the 
image. The effect is shown schematically in Figure 4.9. The mass-thickness 
contrast mechanism is exploited by most biological microscopists, who delib­
erately stain the thin specimen with a heavy metal, such as osmium, which 
zzzPsgiolePfrpSpeC;l "" 
, Objcoll 
Lens " , \ 
// I \ al 
\ , \ ./ , 
, \ 
, ! '\ \. 
\ \ I 
\ '\ \ 1 
\ 
tive \1 
\1; 
" , , \ 
\ I \ ' , , ' U\ / a\ 
! \ \ ; , \ , , 
; / 
11/ / /, / / / Y / 
, ,/ 
\1/ 
/ 
Figure 4.8 The objective aperture is located in the back focal plane of the objective lens. It pre­
vents any electrons which have been scattered by the specimen through an angle 
larger than CI from passing down the column and contributing to the image. An 
animated version ci this diagram can be found in MATIER: Introduction to electron 
microscopes. 
50 50 50 
47 43 37 
Figure 4.9 The scattering of electrons from different regions of a thin specimen. In a thin area 
(to the left) only a few electrons are scattered and perhaps 47 of the original 50 inci­
dent electrons continue undeflected. In a thicker region of the same material 
(centre) more are scattered and perhaps only 43 remain in the undeflected beam. 
From a region of the same thickness but higher density even more scattering will 
take place and perhaps only 37 electrons continue to pass through the objective 
aperture. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp78 Electron microscopy and analysis 
j 
(a) (b) 
Figure 4./0 An animal cell (a cartilage cell from chick trachea) photographed (a) with and (b) 
without an objective aperture in position. 
decorates specific features of interest. Figure 4.10 shows an animal cell which 
has been stained so that osmium has collected in the chromatin. If the 
objective aperture is removed (Figure 4.10(b», the contrast almost 
disappears, since virtually all of the electrons can then contribute to the 
image. A lillIe contrast remains because the bore of the microscope (only 
I mm or so in diameter) acts as a large aperture. 
All transmission electron microscopists must be aware of mass-thickness 
contrast since all specimens -amorphous or crystalline, biological or 
inorganic -will show it. Other contrast mechanisms can be superimposed and 
may be more important in individual cases. 
Both elastic and inelastic sealleri ng of high-energy electrons only change the 
direction by a small amount, so the angle ct subtended by the objective aperture 
often needs to be less than one degree. The actual diameter of the aperture is 
determined by the focallcngth (and hence magnification) of the objective lens; 
for modern microscopes, three apertures with diameters of 20,50 and lOO~lm 
arc typically available. 
In scanning transmission electron microscopes (STEMs), the same effect 
may be exploited by using an annular detector which collects electrons which 
have been scallered through relatively large angles. Since the inelastic sealler­
ing power of an atom is proportional to the square of its atomic number Z, 
atoms with higher Z appear brighter. This Z-colllrasf imaging is a useful way of 
gelling compositional information from complex structures (Figure 4.1 I (a». 
Furthermore, if a crystalline specimen is aligned such that the electron beam 
passes down a crystallographic axis and the probe size is sufficiently small, the 
inelastic scallering from each column of atoms can be imaged. These images 
have advantages over other high resolution images of atom columns in that the 
atom columns always appear bright, and appear brighter if they have a higher 
average atomic number (Figure 4.II(b». 
zzzPsgiolePfrpBright field 
(" 
(bl 
Figure 4. I I Atomic number (Z) contrast obtained using a high-angle annular dark field 
(HAADF) detector in a STEM. (0) Nickel precipitates in silicon appear dark in a 
bright field image and bright in a Z-contrast image. (b) Z-contrast image of a 
c-axistwist boundary in Bi1Sr1Ca1Cu10IO. The position of the twist boundary be­
tween the double BiO layers can be identified directly from the Z-contrast image 
(courtesy of K. Kishida and N. D. Browning, University of Illinois at Chicago). 
zzzPsgiolePfrp80 Electron microscopy and analysis 
In the near future, "super" STEMs, in which spherical aberration is corrected 
using complex computer-controlled lenses, will be able to achieve probe sizes 
smaller than 0"1 nm, which may allow investigation of materials on a sub­
atomic scale. 
4,2.2 Diffraction contrast -kinematical 
If the specimen is crystalline then an additional contrast mechanism is encoun­
tered. Diffraction of the electron beam, described in dctail in Chapter 3, means 
that thc intcnsity of scattering is greatly increased at particular oricntations of 
the specimen. The objective aperture can then be used to allow either the 
undeflected beam or a diffracted beam to form the image, thus giving strong 
contrast from regions which arc diffracting strongly. There are many ways to 
use this contrast mechanism, and it is only possible to give a cursory descrip­
tion here. In order to understand the contrast which appears in such images, it 
is necessary to appreciate the main characteristics of electron diffraction. One 
of the more important parameter s in the description of electron diffraction is 
the eXlinClio n distance (equation 3.9), and generally sharp images arc only 
obtained when this is relatively small -a few tens of nm. Inspection of 
equations 3.10 and 3.11 shows that this only occurs for relatively low index 
reflections, and most diffraction contrast images are thus formed with the 
crystal oriented such that only the undeflected beam and one low index dif­
fracted beam are present in the diffraction pattern. 
Figure 4.12 illustrates the imaging conditions which are most frequently 
used. The sample is tilted so that a Kikuchi line runs through the undeflected 
beam (Figure 4.12(a)); the parallel Kikuchi line then runs through a strongly 
diffracted beam (scction 3.4.1). In bright field imaging, the objective aperture is 
used to stop all diffracted beams and only permits undeflected electrons to 
contribute to the image (Figure 4.12(b)). If the aperture is displaced it can be 
used to select a particular diffracted beam, as shown in Figure 4.12(c). This is 
known as dark field imaging since in the absence ofa specimen the background 
appears dark. However, if a dark field image is created by displacing the 
aperture, aberrations arc likely to be introduced since all the imaging 
electrons arc travelling far from thc optical axis -where spherical aberration 
is large. A better method, avoiding this problem, is to tilt the incident elcctron 
beam so that the chosen diffracted beam travels along the optical axis and 
passes through a centred aperture (Figure 4.12(d». This is technically simple 
to achieve but the microscopist needs to have a fairly dcep understanding of the 
diffraction geometry to understand exactly how to orient both beam and 
specimen appropriately. 
There is a wide variety of effects that can be achieved using diffraction 
contrast. Anything which changes the planes giving rise to Bragg diffraction 
becomes visible, ineluding dislocations, stacking faults and other crystallo­
graphic defects. Changes in composition in multi-clement compound s can 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 81 
loJ Ibl 
I<J Id, 
Figure 4. / 2 Common imaging conditions. (0) A diffraction pattern centred on the optical axis of 
the microscope (indicated by the cross). A two-beam condition (only one strong dif­
fracted beam) has been produced by tilting the specimen such that a Kikuchi line 
runs through the undeflected beam. (b) The objective aperture centred over the 
undeflected beam to produce a bright field image. (el The aperture displaced to 
permit a diffracted beam to pass. giving a low resolution dark field image. (d) 
Tilting cithe incident beam so that the dtffracted beam is on the optical axis. passing 
through the centred objective aperture, giving a standard dark field image. In real­
ity the material around the aperture would of course be completely opaque. An 
animated version of this diagram together with a ray diagram can be found In 
MATIER: Introduction to electron microscopes. 
alter the structure factor, which determines the diffracted intensity (section 
3.1.2). The only disadvantage of this sensitivity occurs when the sample is 
bent. In this case the diffraction conditions will change across the field of 
view, which can make interpretation more difficult. 
Before it is possible to understand the contrast which arises from defects, it 
is necessary to consider the effects which can arise with perfect crystals. A 
qualitative argument shows that a perfcctly flat single crystal specimen can 
give rise to different intensity levels in the image depending on its exact 
orientation. Let us assume that one set of crystal planes is almost parallel 
to the electron beam and therefore close to fulfilling Bragg's law (equation 
3.1). We will call these the operating planes and describe them by the rccip­
rocal lattice vector g. A simplistic model (Figure 4.13) shows that if these 
planes arc exactly at the Bragg condition strong diffraction will result and the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp82 Electron microscopy and analysis 
(,) (b) 
Figure 4. I 3 A crystallin e specimen aligned so that the electron beam strikes one set of lattice 
planes exactly at their Bragg angle. The majority of electrons in the beam are dif­
fracted and few continue to pass through the objective aperture. (b) The same spe­
cimen tilted a small angle ll.O from its previous position. Even if ll.O is as small as 
o· 25 degrees the lattice planes may be so far from the Bragg condition that a negli­
gible amount of dfffraction will occur and virtua!ly the whole of the electron beam 
passes through the aperture. 
Buckled 
cry,talline 
foil 
Figure 4.14 The bright field image of a buckled single crystal foil will show dark lines (extinction 
contours) in regions where the specimen is in the Bragg condition. 
bright field image will therefore appear dark. If the specimen is tilted slightly 
(perhaps only a small fraction of a degree, exaggerated in Figure 4.13(b», 
Bragg's law will no longer be obeyed, diffraction will be weak and a bright 
image will result. 
Most real specimens are not perfectly flat and arc elastically buckled to some 
extent. The image should therefore contain dark regions which correspond to 
those regions of the specimen which are at the Bragg angle, together with light 
regions corresponding to parts of the specimen which arc not strongly diffract­
ing. The dark regions are known as extinction contours and their formation is 
shown schematically in Figure 4.14. They arc an inevitable feature of the 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 83 
''''' (a) (b) 
Figure 4./5 A buckled region ofa stainless steel foil which shows a major extinction contour 
(almost vertical) in both bright field (0) and dark field (b) imaging conditions. 
Notice the subsidiary fringes, which are especially dear in the dark field image. 
contrast from a bucklcd crystalline specimcn and their width serves to indicate 
the extent of buckling. Figure 4.15 shows a rathcr buckled rcgion of a stainless 
steel foil containing many extinction contours, each of which arises from 
diffraction from a particular set of planes. 
In Chapter 3 (equation 3.10) we discussed the exprcssion for thc intensity of 
diffraction as a function of thickness. Simplified slightly, this is: 
(4. I ) 
where s is the magnitudc of the deviation paramcter, which dcscribes the 
distance in reciprocal space from the Bragg condition (scction 3.3.2) and C,iI 
is the extinction distance. This expression is only accurate for very thin 
specimens where the intensity of diffracted beams is negligible, in so-called 
kinematical conditions. However using this expression we can qualitatively 
interprct the finc details of extinction contours. A plot of Iii against s is 
known as a rocking C1IrI·/? since variation of s can be obtained by rocking a 
l1at crystalline spccimen through the Bragg condition. The rocking curve which 
is obtained from equation 4.1 at constant thickness I is shown schematically in 
Figure 4.16. Clcarly the kinematical theory gives a strange result when s is elose 
to zero since the intensity calculatcd from equation 4.1 then becomes very 
large. This is one of thc rcasons that the dynamical theory is necded and we 
therefore deal with it in the next section. 
A buckled specimen provides a range of s values without the nced for 
rocking, so we should expect extinction contours to show subsidiary fringcs 
zzzPsgiolePfrp84 Electron microscopy and analysis 
" ! :' " 
r ' r ' 
0', , ' , ' 
!\F'V' '"I , '" : " , , j, : , , , 
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 1,0 
, , , , , , , , , , 
, , , , , , , , , , , I, 
, 
o , , , , , , , , , , , , , 
1 
Figure 4.16 Rocking curves calculated for kinematical (full line) and dynamical (broken line) 
two-beam assumptions. The diffracted intensity is plotted against the parameter s,s. 
exactly as does the rocking curve. These fringes are visible on both sides of the 
main extinction contour in Figure 4.15. Extinction contours are one of the 
major imaging artefacts which it is necessary to be able to recognize in a 
crystalline specimen. They can be easily distinguished from actual crystal 
defects by tilting the specimen a lillIe. Extinction contours, being simply 
contours showing the location of planes of similar orientation, will appear to 
move across the image as the specimen is tilted and different planes are brought 
into the Bragg condition. Defects embedded in the specimen will of course not 
move as the specimen is tilted, although they may change in appearance. 
A second frequently observed image artefact can also be explained using 
equation 4.1. For a constant value of s (that is, for a fixed orientation) the 
intensity varies periodically with t, becoming zero each time the product IS is an 
integer. A typical wedge-shaped specimen, shown schematically in Figure 
4. I 7(a), therefore shows thickness fringes which in a bright field image 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 85 
0·5 jJm 
(0) (b) 
Figure 4./7 (0) Schematic diagram of the cross-section of a wedge-shaped specimen. 
(b) Thickness fringes (almost vertical) in a metal foil which gets thicker towards 
the left of the micrograph. 
will be dark at the thickness t = II/S. Figure 4.l7(b) shows the appearance 
of these fringes (sec also Figure 4.42). Note that the kinematical theory 
cannot explain why the fringes still exist even at the exact Bragg orientation, 
when s = 0; the kinematical theory then predicts that intensity simply rises 
proportionally with thickness. We need the dynamical theory, outlined in the 
next section, to account for contrast at small values of s. 
4.2.3 Diffraction contrast -dynamical 
If a crystalline specimen is thicker than about one third of the extinction 
distance (I;g is a few tens of nm for most materials and operating reflections) 
then there will be appreciable interaction between the electron beams as they 
travel through the solid. For example, diffracted electrons can be scattered 
back into the original beam direction. In fact, this is very likely since a dif­
fracted electron must be travelling at the Bragg angle to the diffracting planes 
and so is unlikely to get very far before it gets diffracted once more. This 
renders the kinematical assumption invalid and the dynamical theory is 
needed. The most straightforward version of this theory only considers the 
interaction between the undeflected beam and one diffracted beam defined 
by the reciprocal lattice vector g. This two-beam theory assumes that all 
other diffracted beams arc very weak. Many-beam theories have been 
developed but they show that the main conelusions of the two-beam theory 
arc not altered by the presence of other minor beams so we will not consider 
them here. There arc several mathematical ways of formulating the two-beam 
theory, but the simplest to understand results in a pair of differential equations 
zzzPsgiolePfrp86 Electron microscopy and analysis 
of this type: 
d$o i11. i11. . 
(I: = c.o $0 + I;g $gexp(211.1.c) 
d$ 111. i11. :'Jig = -$0 exp( -211.is:) + -$, 
d, (" '" (4.2) 
These Howie-Whelan eq uations describe the variation of the amplitudes, $, of 
the undd1ccted and diffracted waves as a function of:, the distance through a 
perfcct crystal. The first term in each equation arises from scattering from the 
undeflected beam (subscript 0) and the sccond term arises from scattering from 
thc diffracted beam (subscript g). They show that the amplitude of each wave 
changes as the wave progresses through the crystal due to a contribution from 
the other. 
This approach can be made even more realistic by ineluding the possibility 
that electrons arc ·absorbed' -or more accurately -inelastically scattered 
through a large angle and blocked by the objective aperture. This can be 
accounted for by replacing the (real) extinction parameter 1/1; with a 
complex parameter 1/1; + i/I;'. Although we shall not attempt to justify this 
approach in this short tex\, it is worth noting that equations 4.2 and their 
refinements arc used to describe all diffraction contrast effects with very 
good experimental agreement for a wide variety of situations. 
Equations 4.2 can be solved analytically for a perfect crystal. In order to 
caleulate the intensity at any point in the image the equations must be inte­
grated over the whole thickness 10 give % and o/g at the exit surface of the 
specimen. The bright field intensity is then given by $00/0 and the dark field 
intensity by $go/;, where' indicates the complex conjugate. The resultant 
diffracted beam (dark field) intensity, for a perfect crystal of thickness I, is 
given by 
which is identical to the kinematical solution (equation 4.1) except for the 
parameter S', known as the effective deviation parameter. The relationship 
between S' and .v is 
Equation 4.3 behaves reasonably even when .v approaches zero and strong 
diffraction occurs. An accurate rocking curve can be deduced, as is shown in 
Figure 4.16. The presence of thickness fringes can also be understood morc 
elearly -in a bright field image, a bright fringe occurs when most of the 
diffracted electrons have been diffracted back into the undefleeted beam. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpJ.5<h liP 
.\111> If)" -
2.50.,10 ' 
I.~' 10" (" 
Y--I·74,1O '. )·G3, 10-' 
H'_~.~h IO-' • The transmission electron microscope 87 
E>.ti""tion di,!:U>Ce ~ 15·7 ron 
~ ;m.:n 1IricJmc .. ~ 166 1IIl 
• .,--
0.0 0 .• Q.11 
(b) lin' 
Figure 4. /8 (0) A two-beam g = 220 CBED pattern from a silicon single crystal. (b) The extinc­
tion distance and specimen thickness can be obtained from the slope of a plOl: of 
s~/n2 against I In2, where So is the value of 5 at the n"' fringe. 
The extinction distance is the thickness of the specimen at the first bright 
fringe. 
Equations 4.3 and 4.4 can be used to measure both the extinction distance 
and thc crystalthickncss from a two-bcam CBED pallern (Figure 4.18(a». A 
'rocking curve' is present in the dark field disk of such a pallcrn, since the 
relationship between the beam direction and crystal planes for a convcrgent 
beam and a fiat specimen is similar to that of a parallel beam and a bent 
specllTIen. 
From equation 4.3, a bright fringc oecurs every timc sin2(nts') = O. i.c. 
[ ( l'I' nt s~ + c,~ = lin 
zzzPsgiolePfrp88 Electron microscopy and analysis 
which can be rearranged to give 
~2 I I 
:..E..= _ +_ 
/12 /121:,2 (2 • 
Now, Sn (the s value at the /1,10 fringe) is simply 
). h.O 
Sn = d" 20B (4.6) 
(4.7) 
where h.O and 20B are shown on Figure 4.18(a). From equation 4.6, a plot of 
s~/lI" against 1//12 has a slope of -I/~~ and a y-intercept of 1/(". Figure 
4.18(b) shows the caleulation using data taken from the CBED pattern of 
Figure 4.18(a). Note the first fringe may not have /I = I; different values of II 
may be needed to obtain a straight line. 
Dejects 
Crystal defects are often of interest and TEM is one of the few techniques that 
can characterize them in detail. The contrast in TEM images of defects is thus 
of considerable interest, and can only be explained satisfactorily using the 
dynamical theory. 
A crystal defect which disturbs the operating planes will locally modify the 
deviation parameter. A more useful pair of Howie-Whelan eq uations (ignoring 
absorption for brevity) is 
d$o in in "::" = -$0 + -o/g exp[2ni(s: + g' R)] 
d, '" <, 
d$g in . In 
d: =~ $oexp[-27t1(s:+g'R)] + ~ $g (4.8) 
In these equations g is the operating diffraction vector (i.e. the reciprocal lattice 
vector which describes the planes which are diffracting) and R is the displace­
ment of atoms from their lattice positions due to the defect, which may vary 
with :. 
In order to solve equations 4.8, a numerical computer method is generally 
necessary. It is usually assumed that the intensity at one point (x, y) in the 
image, which arises from one column (x, y, : = 0 to t) in the specimen, is 
independent of the behaviour of the electron beams in adjacent columns. 
This is known as the COIIlIllIl approxilllatioll and it holds very accurately in 
most situations. The computed image is built up pixel by pixel, as Figure 
4.19 illustrates. 
The term g' R in equations 4.8 simply modifies the product.c and can thus 
be interpreted in terms of the effect which the defect has on the operating 
planes. When g' R is zero, the displacements do not disturb the operating 
planes and so the defect is invisible. For many of the crystal defects of most 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 89 
Specimen 
Figure 4. /9 The geometry of a TEM image, either calculated or reaL The image consists of pixels 
such as P. the intensity of which arises from scattering in the column C at position 
!(, y. 
interest we know the nature of the displacement field R(x.)" =) and so we can 
understand and predict the appearance of their images in the TEM. We will 
consider here a few simple examples. 
Planar defects 
Stacking faults. grain boundaries and phase boundaries arc planar defects 
which arc frequently studied in projection as they cross the thin specimen. 
For a stacking fault, if we ignore any local strain. then in each column R is 
effectively zero for all positions above the fault plane and has a non-zero but 
constant value everywhere below the fault. If the fault is a displacement fault, 
such as the common stacking fault in the fcc structure, then the value of s is 
the same above and below the fault, because no lallice planes are tilted by the 
fault. If the fault has a misorientation associated with it, then the value of s 
will change abruptly at the fault plane. Figure 4.20 shows these two types of 
behaviour. In some circumstances faults giving rise 10 both displacement and 
misorientation can occur; in these cases both Rand s change at the fault. 
The characteristic contrast of stacking faults consists of fringes running 
parallel to the intersection of the fault with the specimen surface. Figure 4.21 
shows an example. The fringes can be thought of as resulting from the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp90 Electron microscopy and analysis 
I ' 
(a) (b) 
Figure 4.20 Schematic diagram showing the two extreme types of planar defect. (a) In a dis­
placement fault the orientation of the crystal is identical on both sides of the fault 
and thus s is unchanged. (b) In an orientation fault s changes across the fault since 
the imaging planes are slightly tilted. In both cases the lattice may be displaced at 
the fault and thus in general R changes from zero to some finite value. 
interference between the beams diffracted in the upper part of the crystal and 
those diffracted below the fault. The diffracted waves suffer a phase change at 
the fault and the fringes arc thus the usual manifestation of interference 
between two sets of waves which arc slightly out of phase. 
Two aspects of fault contrast arc of particular interest. It is elear from 
equations 4.5 that if the product g·R is zero (or indeed an integer) then the 
crystal containing a stacking fault will give contrast identical to that from a 
perfect crystal. The condition for g. R to be zero is that the fault vector R is 
perpendicular to the operating reflection g. Thus for example in Figure 4.21(c) 
the faults are invisible because the fault vector is 1/6(112] and g is 220. Another 
way of thinking about this is that the image is being formed using diffraction 
from the (110) plane but this plane is unaffected by the presence of the stacking 
fault. The fault thus cannot be detectcd using these diffraction conditions. This 
'invisibility criterion' can be used to identify the displacement vector of a 
stacking fault. 
A second useful form of contrast can be exploited by imaging a displacement 
fault in both bright field and dark field. Although the kinematical theory would 
imply that the bright field and dark field images should be complementary (i.e. 
with dark and bright fringes reversed), this is not what is found in reasonably 
thick specimens. The dynamical theory correctly predicts the contrast illus­
tnlted in Figure 4.21(a) and (b), which shows a top/bottom effcct. The caleu­
lated fringe image is shown in Figure 4.22. The images from the region of fault 
ncar the bottom of the specimen arc indeed complementary but the images 
from the top of the foil arc similar (i.e. a bright fringe in dark field corresponds 
to a bright fringe in bright field). Thus the two possible inclinations of the fault 
can be distinguished, as Figure 4.21 shows. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp(. ) 
t --~. 
(b) 
O·5~m 
«) 
Figure 4.21 Three images of a heavily faulted region in a specimen of stainless steel. In (a) and (b) 
the faults are in contrast while in image (el they are invisible. Images (a) and (b) 
are a bright field/dark field pair. from which the orientation of the fault may be 
deduced. The calculated image from a similar fault is shown in Figure 4.19. The 
complementary nature of the fringes at the bottom (B) of the specimen and the 
similarity at the top (T) is particularly clear at A. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp92 Electron microscopy and analysis 
". \ • 
J 
Top '. 
• • , , , , 
• 
• , , 
• I , . 
V I 
• ,; .. .. , 
: , , .. 
• • \ . C 
Bottom 
Figure 4.22 Calculated fringes from a stacking fault with g" R = 1/3 in a specimen of thickness 
1St" The bright field image (full line) is symmetric about the middle of the specimen 
while the dark field image (broken line) is not. The part of the fault at the top of 
the foil therefore shows the same fringes in both bright and dark field images. 
while at the bottom of the foil the bright field and dark field images are comple­
mentary. 
The other main type of planar defect is the grain or phase boundary. across 
which the orientation (and possibly the lallice parameter or structure) change 
significantly. In most cases this means that we cannot descrilx: the diffraction 
conditions on both sides of the boundary in terms of the same g. One grain. say 
the top grain in Figure 4.23, may be set up with two-beam conditions 
characterized by a deviation SI from the operating reflection gl' The lower 
grain may be unlikely to be ncar a two-beam condition, and even if it is the 
values of g2 and S2 will be different from gl and SI. The most common con­
sequence of this is that the strongly diffracting grain (top in this example) 
shows thickness fringes as if it were just a tapered single crystal, while the 
other (bollom) grain contributes lillIe to the contrast. The net effect is a set 
of fringes running parallel to the intersection of the boundary with the surface 
(Figure 4.24). The spacing of the fringes depends on SI. A dark field image will 
allow these fringes to be easily distinguished from those of a stacking fault, 
since the diffracting grain will appear bright and the grain which is not diffract­
ing will appear dark. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 93 
II11111 I/Ii 11111111111' 11'/1: 1111111111 U II/ U II 
1J),111111 I 1/11111111 1"",111111 1)111 , 111'111 I 1/'1' S g '1'1'111 I 
III,IIUIII I 1/11 1 11111111111/ I I I I I I , " ., I I I I I I I 
11)111111111 /1(11111111111111111 
1/11111111 I 1111111111 1111111 , , 11/1111111111)111111111111111 
I ~ '" , '1""""" 'I' 1'1'1111111111)1111111111 I 
1'1'111 I I 1)1111111111 
• I T 11111111 111I111111 
'111/11111111111)111111 I I I I I I I I I 1)1 I I I 
S2 g2 11111)11111111111)11 
I " I I , 111I1)i/illlllll I) ]LIlli 1111111111 
Figure 4.23 The diffraction conditions at a grain boundary. lfthe upper (right) grain is oriented 
such that the operating planes deviate by SI from gl' then it is likely that a dtfferent 
vector (g2) will be excited in the lower (left) grain. at a different and probably 
much larger deviation $2 . 
• 
• 
• • " • 
Figure 4.24 Grain boundary fringes in a stainless steel specimen. • 
." -,-
• • , . 
---5,1! 
When both crystals arc strongly diffracting, yet another source of fringes can 
appear. These arc moire fringes. They arc common in images of thin layers of 
one crystalline material deposited on another, but can arise in any situation 
where two crystals are diffracting with slightly different values of g. The 
situation is illustrated in Figure 4.2S(a), where the planar boundary is 
parallel to the plane of the specimen, and the lower crystal has a slightly 
larger lalliee parameter than the upper crystal. We ignore any differences in 
zzzPsgiolePfrp94 Electron microscopy and analysis 
1;y and s in the two erystals. The displacement R varies with posItIOn in the 
crystal below the boundary plane. If we choose one point to have zero dis­
placement. then R will increase linearly with distance from that point, and will 
point away from the origin. Since it is g' R which is important for changes in 
the elcctron intensity, thcre will be a line, along which R is perpendicular to g 
and hence g' R is zero, where the electron beam will have thc same intensity as 
at the origin (Figure 4.25(b)). Perpendicular to this direction, the intensity will 
also be the same as at the origin every time g' R is an integer. Between these 
points the electron amplitude varies sinusoidally. The net effect is a set of 
fringes running perpendicular to g with spacing 
I I d=---
91 92 (4.9) 
Moire fringes can also be seen at boundari es between crystals with a slight 
rotation. The only condition is that a strongly diffracted beam from each 
crystal passes through the objective aperture. An important point is that the 
fringes will be seen in both bright field and dark field images. An example of 
moire fringes seen at the interface between Pd2Si and silicon is shown in Figure 
4.25(c). 
Line defects -dislocotions 
Near the core of a dislocation , lallice planes are usually bent quite severely but 
the extent of lallice bending decreases at greater distances. Qualitatively it is 
quite easy to explain the appearance of an edge dislocation as a dark line in the 
TEM (e.g. Figure 4.26). Figure 4.27 shows lallice bending schematically. If the 
crystal far from the dislocation is set in a two-beam condition, near to but not 
at the Bragg orientation (i.e. s is not zero), then the bent planes on one side of 
the dislocation core must reach the Bragg orientation (s = 0) and will diffract 
more strongly than their surroundings. This is true all along the dislocation line 
and it will therefore appear as a dark line in a bright field image. A similar 
argument can be made for a screw dislocation, although the plane bending is 
harder to show in a sketch. 
In terms of equation 4.5 the displacement R is clearly a function of x, y and: 
for a dislocation. R therefore varies along each column in an image (Figure 
4.28) and it is necessary 10 integrate the Howie-Whelan equations numerically 
in order to calculate the image contrast from a dislocation. It is evident 
however that if g' R is zero all the way down a column the dislocation must 
be invisible. The displacement field of a dislocation in an infinite isotropic solid 
is well known and can be wrillen as 
R I {b" b sin 2~ b (I -2v I ~'iio", 2".,,) } ~-'+'+ e + xu nr+, 2It 4(I-v) 2(I-v) 4(I-v) (4.\0) 
where r and ~ are defined in Figure 4.28 and v is Poisson's ratio for the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp, 
.) 
(b) 
SOnm 
«) 
Figure 4.25 (0) The case ci a boundary between dissimilar materials in the plane of the 
specimen. The displacement vettor R increases away from the origin O. (b) The 
formation of moire fringes when the operating planes in the two crystals are 
parallel. (e) An image showing moire fringes in a specimen of Pd1Si on silicon. 
(N. A. McAuley) 
zzzPsgiolePfrp96 Electron microscopy and analysis 
• 
Figure 4.26 Dislocations in strong dtffraction contrast in a meta! specimen. 
material; b is the Burgers veetor and be is its edge component (i.e. that 
component perpendicular to the dislocation line vector u). For a screw disloca­
tion, equation 4.7 simplifies to 
(4.11) 
In this case, R is directly proportional to b and therefore such a dislocation will 
bc invisible if g·b is zero. For example, a screw dislocation of Burgers veetor 
a/2[110] will be invisible in a two-ocam image with g = 002 or TIl but visible 
when g = 202 (when g·b = I). Another way ofpulting this is that this disloca­
tion does not bend the (002) plane but it does bend the (101) plane (which is the 
same as bending the (202) plane). Figure 4.29 shows an example of screw 
dislocation invisibility. If two conditions of invisibility can be found the 
direction of b can be determined uniquely and this is the basic technique for 
finding the Burgers vectors of dislocations in TEM images. 
For an edge or mixed dislocation, where b is no longer parallcllO u, equation 
4.6 shows that g·R is only zero when g·b and g·b x u are both zero. This is a 
more difficult condition to satisfy and very often an edge dislocation will 
display some faint residual contrast when g·b = 0 occause g·b x u is not 
also zero. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 97 
, 
Imqc 
Figure 4.27 Diffraction contrast at an edge dislocation. If the crystal far from the dislocation 
(shaded area) is set at an orientation close to the Bragg condition (i.e. with 5 
large), then the lattice on one side of the dislocation core at C will be bent locally 
into the Bragg condition (s = 0). This part ci the specimen will therefore diffract 
the beam strongly and will appear dark in a bright field image. 
Since equation (4.7) applies to dislocations in infinite material and the TEM 
specimen is very thin, we might expect some differences in the contrast 
behaviour of dislocations in regions where relaxation of the internal strain is 
significant -i.e. at the surfaces of the specimen. This is visible in Figure 4.29, 
where dislocations invisible in the bulk of the specimen show a dot of contrast 
where they meet the specimen surfacc. 
It is generally assumed that for lattice dislocations, where g·b must be an 
integer, dislocations are invisible if g·b = 0, visible if gob = I and visible but 
likely to have unusual images (e.g. a double line) if g·b ~ 2. Partial dislocations 
may however have non-integral values of g' b. For example, a Shockley partial 
dislocation with b = a/6[112] would have g·b = 1/3 if imaged with g = 200 
and g·b = 2/3 using g = 220. The rule of thumb for visibility is that a partial 
dislocation is visible if g·b > t. However it should be borne in mind that, by 
definition, a partial dislocation must bound a region of stacking fault, so it will 
be necessary to consider the visibility of both the stacking fault and the dis­
location in order to interpret an image containing partial dislocations. In 
zzzPsgiolePfrp98 Electron microscopy and analysis 
d 
f , 
" , , , 
Figure 4.28 A column of crystal dose to an edge dislocation with Burgers vector b at a depth d 
in a specimen of thickness t. For each step in the integration of the Howie­
VVhelan equation the displacement due to the dislocation must be calculated for 
the element dz positioned at r. <jJ. The dislocation line direction u is into the paper. 
Figure 4.21 for example. most of the partial disloeations bounding the faults 
are out of eontrast in images (a) and (b) but are in very strong contrast in image 
(c) when the faults themselves are invisible. 
It is increasingly the case that we know the nature of most defects in 
materials of common crystal structure. The problems which are now being 
addressed tend to involve dislocations in complex crystal structures. new 
alloys and materials. and in unusual combinations. For these purposes the 
simple 'two invisibility conditions' method of determining b is often unsatis­
factory and an alternative approach is needed. One approach is to compute the 
images expected from likely dislocation geometries and to compare these cal­
culated images with experimental images taken using the appropriate diffrac­
tion conditions. An example of this technique is shown in Figure 4.30. Each 
computed image consists of about 100 000 pixels; the intensity has been calcu­
lated by numerically integrating the Howie-Whelan equations using the 
column approximation. Another approach is to use the dynamical diffraction 
effects which occur when a relatively high index bend contour crosses a dis­
location image (Figure 4.31). It has been shown that a bend contour. which is a 
single line away from the dislocation. splits into braids when it crosses the 
dislocation line. The number of braids gives the value of gob. and the shape 
of the braiding can be used to determine whether g 'b is positive or negative. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp250nm 
(,) 
-I 
g 020 
(b) 
Figure 4.29 Two images of an array of screw dislocations in a niobium-stabilized steel, together 
with the diffraction pattern in each case. In (a) one set of dislocations is out ci con­
trast since its Burgers vector is perpendicular to the operating g vector. In (b) 
both sets are visible. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp100 Electron microscopy and analysis 
g.b= 1 .. 
g.b = 1 
g.b ~-1 Dark field 
Bright field 
g.b =1 
Bright field 
f{' C iOI' i 7 7 - -
g.b ~-1 
Figure 4.30 Experimental (centre column) and computed (outer columns) images of disloca­
tions in gallium arsenide under three different diffraction conditions (courtesy of 
Drs Ruvimov and Scheerschmidt. Max Planck Institut fiir Microstrukturphysi k. 
Halle). 
The magnitude of g·b ean also be determined from dark field, weak beam 
images (sec below). 
Some other examples of diffraction contrast 
Diffraction contrast is very widely used 10 image specific defects and second 
phases in crystalline materials. Once the essential relationship between image 
and diffraction pallern is understood, the possibilities arc limitless. We shall 
describe just a few examples. 
SMALL CRYSTALLINE PARTICLES 
These may differ from the matrix in which they arc embedded in atomic mass, 
lallice parameter, crystal structure or orientation. They may also strain the 
matrix in rather the same way as a dislocation, bending lallice planes. Any 
one of these effects could be used to form an image of the particles and their 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 101 
Figure 4.31 Braiding of a 440 extinction contour in a large-angle CBED pattern as it crosses a 
1/2[110] dislocation (arrowed) in a diamond specimen. The number of fringes 
gives g. b + I. (Courtesy of D. Cherns. University of Bristol.) 
distribution. For example one of the small precipitates in Figure 4.32(0) can be 
seen because it is of different structure to the matrix and diffracts strongly in 
these imaging conditions. In Figure 4.32(b) the same strained particle, together 
with another, can be seen because the matrix is elastically strained and the 
imaging lattice planes are bent. The images are therefore rather larger than the 
particles themselves. The larger particles in Figure 4.32(c) can be seen by virtue 
of their higher density, while in Figure 4.32(d) some of them have been made to 
show up in a dark field image formed by permitting only the electron beam 
resulting from diffraction within appropriately oriented particles to pass 
through the objective aperture. 
A SMALL CAVITY 
This is an extreme case of a local change in density of the specimen. The image 
of a cavity may therefore arise from mass-thickness contrast if kinematical 
conditions prevail (i.e. small thickness or large value of s). The cavity will 
then appear lighter than its background in a bright field image, although this 
effect may be small and a more noticeable effect may be the Fresnel fringes 
arising from near field diffraction at the interfaces when the image is defocused. 
However in dynamical conditions the column of crystal containing the ca vity is 
of appreciably smaller thickness than its surroundings and the ca vity may show 
zzzPsgiolePfrp102 Electron microscopy and analysis 
200nm 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
Figure 4.32 Precipitates in a rapidly solidified and extruded AI-Cr-Zr alloy. (a) Matrix weakly 
diffracting and one particle strongly diffracting: (b) the same area as (a) with the 
matrix set close to a strong diffracting condition. Two particles show strain con­
trast. (c) A bright field image showing large particles dark because of absorption. 
(d) the same area as (c) imaged in dark field using a precipitate spot to show some 
of the particles clearly. (P. S. Goodwin and N. J. E. Adkins. University of Surrey) 
contrast aflsmg from thickness fringes. Examples of these vanous types of 
contrast arc shown in Figure 4.33. 
DARK FIELD. WEAK BEAM IMAGING CONDITIONS 
These can be used to observe fine detail in images of dislocations, and under 
appropriate conditions, determine the magnitude of g' b. A rough estimate of 
zzzPsgiolePfrp• 
O.1l-lm 
(" 
o 
(b I 
Figure 4.33 Two images of the same region of an aluminium specimen containing small helium 
bubbles. (0) In dynamical conditions the cavities appear bright against dark regions 
of the extinaion contour and dark against bright regions. (b) In kinematic con­
ditions the cavities are very slightly brighter than the background but are more 
visible when. as here. the image is very slightly out of focus and each bubble is 
surrounded by a dark fringe. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp104 Electron microscopy and analysis 
the width of a dislocation image obtained with s close to zero is one third of the 
extinction distance ~ for the operating reflection g. Since extinction distances 
for low index reflections for most crystalline materials are in the range 10-
200 nm, the image width is appreciable, and may make it difficult to resolve 
dislocations which are close together. This situation can be greatly improved 
using the ·weak beam' technique. The dynamical theory ofclectron diffraction 
showed that the effective deviation parameter s' is given by equation 4.4. In a 
similar way it can be shown that the effective extinction distance when s is not 
zero IS: 
(4.12) 
When s is large, dislocation images have a width ofapproximatcly c..rr/3. At a 
deviation of s = 5/"f:,g (which is easily attainable) the image width will be about 
a factor of 5 smaller than at s = O. Figures 4.34(0) to (c) show images of 
dislocations in Si for the conditions sclose to zero and s = 25/~ . The improve­
ment is obvious. Note also that in the weak beam image, thickness fringes 
terminate at the ends of the dislocation to the right. The number of fringes 
which terminate gives the value of g·b for the reflection used. 
Weak beam images are usually taken in dark field since the contrast is small, 
and is difficult to detect in a bright field image. The amount of diffracted 
intensity in the ·weak' beam with diffraction vector g is improved by using a 
stronger diffracted beam, usually with diffraction vector 2g or 3g, and the 
diffraction conditions are usually described as .g, Ng', where N describes 
the strongly diffracted beam. The larger the value of N, the larger is sand 
the narrower the image. Obviously, a limit is reached in that the intensity of the 
weak beam beeomes so low it becomes difficult to obtain any image; even 
images taken using g, 3g imaging conditions may need exposures five to ten 
times longer than the bright field image. 
The way a g, 3g imaging condition is set up using the diffraction pattern is 
shown in Figure 4.34(dl. Again, the diffracted beam of interest is made to lie on 
the optical axis of the microseope by tilting the incident beam. As is apparent 
from comparison with Figure 4.12, in the ease of weak beam imaging the sense 
of tilt is opposite to that used for conventional dark field imaging. 
COMPOSITIONAL CONTRAST 
This ean be obtained in materials which the crystal structure stays the same 
while the composition varies (i.e. solid solutions). If a diffracted beam, which 
has a structure factor dependent upon the composition of the material, is used 
to form an image changes in composition can easily be detected. For example, 
in ternary or quaternary I II-V semiconductors, the 002 diffracted beam has an 
intensity which is roughly proportional to the difference in atomic number, Z, 
between the group III and group V clements (ignoring absorption effects). An 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 105 
(dl 
Figure 4.34 (0) A bright field and (b), (e) dark field, weak beam images of dislocations in silicon. 
Note the decrease in the width of the dislocation image and the termination of 
thickness fringes at the ends of the dislocation, (g-b = 2 in (b). gob = I in (e)). 
(d) The diffraction pattern for a g. 3g dark field weak-beam imaging condition. 
Note that the incident beam is tilted in the opposite direction to that used for con­
ventional dark field imaging (Figu re 4.12). 
example of such an image is shown in Figure 4.35, where the lnP layers appear 
bright (average difference between group III and V atomic number = 17) and 
the Ino.nGao.47As layers appear dark (average difference between group III 
and V atomic number = 4.77). 
Two important points should be emphasized concerning the contrast mecha­
nisms discussed so far. Mass-thickness and diffraction contrast may be present 
at the same time, as for instance in Figure 4.24, in which the region at the lower 
left is thinner and therefore brighter than the res\. Secondly, several manifesta­
tions of the effect are likely to appear in any specimen. For example the 
micrographs in Figures 4.15, 4.18, 4.21 and 4.24 were all taken from neigh­
bouring regions of the same specimen. The diffraction conditions were of 
course carefully selected by tilting the specimen or beam or both. 
Both mass-thickness and diffraction contrast are amplitude contrast mech­
anisms because they employ only the amplitudes of the scattered waves. We 
zzzPsgiolePfrp106 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 4.35 A dark field g = 002 image of layers cI different compositions in a III-V hetero­
junction laser structure. The contrast arises from the change in the structure 
factor of the 002 dtffracted beam with composition. 
now consider phase contrast, in which the image detail results from interfer­
ence between waves of different phases and thus uses the phase shifts produced 
by scattering. 
4.2.4 Phase contrast 
Phase contrast results whenever electrons of different phase arc allowed to pass 
through the objective aperture. Since most electron scattering mechanisms 
involve a phase change this means that some sort of phase contrast is 
present in every image, since it is impossible to use an objective aperture 
small enough to stop any deflected electrons contributing to the image. 
There therefore tends to be a phase contrast component to all images, 
sometimes noticeable at high magnifications as a speckled background. 
However phase contrast becomes really useful when two or more diffracted 
beams arc allowed to pass through the objective aperture and interfere. In 
order to achieve this a larger aperture is needed than is commonly used for 
diffraction or mass-thickness contrast. 
Each pair of beams which interferes will in principle give rise to a set of 
fringes in the image. The simplest way of exploiting this is to obtain a two­
beam condition and allow just those two beams to pass through the aperture, 
as shown in Figure 4.36. A better alternative, avoiding spherical aberration 
effects, is 10 place the undiffracted beam halfway between the Kikuchi lines and 
use thrce beams: +g, 0 and -g. In both these cases a lattice image is formed, in 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 107 
• + • 
Figure 4.36 A two-beam lattice image of gallium arsenide showing one set offringes from the 
(III) planes (horizontal). The two beams (000 and III) were symmetrically placed 
around the optical axis, as shown in the diagram. in order to minimize spherical 
aberration. (U. Bangert. UMIST) 
which each dark fringe appears to represent a lattice plane. This may be true in 
ideal conditions but for reasons beyond the scope of this book there is not 
in general a one-to-one correspondence between fringes and planes. 
Nevertheless many useful images have been recorded this way and some of 
the earliest micrographs of this type of image confirmed the idea of an 'extra 
half plane' at an edge dislocation. 
A more common, and indeed more useful, type of phase contrast image is 
formed when more diffracted beams are used to form the image. By tilting the 
crystal such that the incident beam is accurately parallel to a zone axis in the 
crystal, many strong diffracted beams can be produced (e.g. Figure 3.14). 
Selecting several beams allows a SlrllCl1Ire image (often called a high-resolution 
electron microscope, or HREM, image) to be formed (Figure 4.37). The many 
lattice fringes intersect and give a pattern of dark (or bright) spots correspond­
ing to atom columns. The interpretation of the contrast in these images is not 
straightforward, since the contrast in the image changes dramatically with 
specimen thickness and defocus. and is also strongly dependent upon the reso­
lution of the microscope, which is itself dependent upon variables such as the 
spherical aberration coefficient c.. of the objcctive lens, and the wavelength of 
the electrons. It is possible that the same specimen in the same microscope can 
give an image in which one dark spot corresponds to columns of atoms, the 
spaces between them, or even a pair of atom columns. 
Good HREM images can only be obtained from thin spccimens. since 
inelastic scattering will tend to degrade the image quality. The microscope 
zzzPsgiolePfrp108 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 4.37 A high-resolution 'structure image' showing a sigma phase precipitate (horizontal) 
in an aluminium alloy. The direction of viewing is exactly along a (110) of the alumi­
nium matrix and a (100) of the precipitate. No objective aperture was used. so 
many beams contributed to the image (K. M. Knowles. University of Cambridge) 
must also be aligned as accurately as possible, and objective lens astigmatism 
must be minimized. These factors, combined with the fact that the 
specimen must be carefully tilted so that the beam direction coincides with a 
crystallographic axis, demands not only an excellcnt microscope but great skill 
and a sophisticated understanding of image formation. Most images cannot be 
fully understood exeept by comparison with a series of computed images 
deduccd from likely structures (Figure 4.38). This comparison can be made 
in a quantitative way by analysing digitized images, i.e. ones in which the image 
is broken up into individual pixels, which allows the images to be analysed 
numerically using a computer. 
4.3 High voltage electron microscopy (HVEM) 
The most obvious effects of increasing the accelerating voltage of a microscope 
arc the reductions in the electron wavelength and in the scattering 
cross-section. These allow increased penetration (permitting the examination 
of thicker specimens) and improved resolution (because of equation 1.9). The 
possibility of removing, to some extent, one of the main limitations of TEM 
(i.e. the need for a very thin specimen) lcd to the installation of several I MeV 
microscopes around the world in the 1970s. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 109 
Figure 4.38 High-resolution phase contrast images of a 1-97 nm thick specimen of 
Nbl6 W 19~ ' which consists of pentagonal columns of metal atoms arranged in a 
complex fashion. The unit cell is marked on the -2Q nm underlocus image. Note 
the changes in bright/dark contrast with defocus and the excellent agreement be­
tween simulated (boxed) and experimental images. (Courtesy of A. I. Kirkland, 
University of Cambridge, recorded on the 300 kV F£GTEM installed at Oxford 
University) 
A very high energy electron has a small cross-section for interaction with the 
electrons of the atoms in the specimen and an even smaller cross-section for 
interaction with the nucleus. In other words a high voltage electron is very 
unlikely to cause damage to inter-atomic bonds and extremely unlikely to 'hit' 
an atom. However, when a 'hit' is scored the potential damage is great. Above 
a threshold energy it is possible to displace a single atom from its site, and this 
is the main disadvantage of HVEMs. The fraction of electrons which will cause 
a displacement is small (say one in ten thousand) but at the beam currents 
allainable in a TEM (say 10 nA), 104 atoms can be displaced per second. The 
threshold rises with atomic number, but is l70keV for aluminium and about 
400keV for nickel. This is usually undesirable, but has been exploited in 
radiation damage experiments, where displacement damage has been used to 
simulate the effect of neutron irradiation. The greater penetrating power 
has been invaluable in the study of complex multi-phase alloys. minerals 
and ceramics. These instruments have also been extensively used for in-situ 
experiments in which the specimen is heated or cooled, strained or reacted 
while under observation. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp110 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Thc fact that the cost of manufacturing and running a TEM tcnds to rise 
approximately linearly with accelerating voltage, combined with the high dis­
placement damagc, has led to the demise of most MeV microscopes. Howcver 
there arc many medi1l111 voltage microscopes, operating at 300 or 400 keV, which 
exploit thc advantagcs of higher elcctron cncrgics. 
4.4 Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) 
It is possiblc to combinc some of the advantages of the TEM and the scanning 
electron microscope (SEM) in the single tcchniquc called STEM. Thc beam is 
focused to as small a spot as possible and is scanncd across the specimen whilc 
some signal is collccted (e.g. X-rays, transmilled, secondary or backscallercd 
electrons). This is discussed briefly in thc ncxt chaptcr (section 5.9.3) but thc 
main rcasons for using STEM arise from its potcntial as an analytical tool. Wc 
thcrefore leave major consideration of the technique until Chapter 7. However, 
many modern transmission microscopes arc equipped with scanning coils 
which enable them to be used in a STEM mode. Such microscopcs arc 
gcnerally called TEMjSTEM microscopes in contrast to the "dedicated 
STEM" instruments which arc described in Chapter 7. Improvemcnts in the 
electron probc sizc of TEMjSTEM microscopes, particularly those with field 
emission guns, have now reduced, pcrhaps cven eliminated , the differcnce in the 
resolution of the best of the two types of machinc. 
4.5 Preparation of specimens for TEM 
It will be elear from the rest of this chapter that there arc many subjects of 
enormous scientific and technical interest which can be studied using TEM. 
However, before any observations can be made, a specimen must first be 
prepared. It is not straightforward to make a specimen thin enough for 
TEM (a few tens of nanomctres to a micron in thickness). The task is made 
harder still by thc necd to avoid changes in the specimcn due to the preparation 
technique, and obtain a representat ive (or somctimes very specific) region. The 
sample must also be strong enough to handle, and last at least long enough to 
bc examined in thc microscope. These are tough requirements, and only rarely 
arc thcy all me\. However it is worth striving for a specimen which gives the 
maximum amount of information with the minimum amount of complex inter­
pretation , and this mcans that a grcat deal of emphasis should be placed on 
specimen preparation. The techniques cmployed vary greatly, depending upon 
the type of material bcing studied, and form the subject of several books and 
many scientific papers (e.g. Goodhew 1985). Thc dcgree of difficulty in sample 
preparation can vary from being almost trivial to a skill which can take weeks 
to master. 
Thc different specimen preparation tcchniques can be divided into two basic 
approaches. First is removal of unwanted material, by cither chemical or mech-
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope III 
anical means, until only a very thin specimen is left behind. Second is cutting, 
in which the sample is either cut with a knife or cleaved along crystallographic 
planes so that a very thin spccimen, or region of a specimen, is produced. We 
will describe here only the basics of the most commonly used techniques. 
4.5. I Electropolishing and chemical polishing 
The most common tcchnique for thinning electrically conductive materials 
such as metals and alloys is electropolishing. The principle of the method is 
that the specimen is made the anode in an electrolytic cell. When a current is 
passed, metal is dissolved from the anode (the specimen) and deposited on the 
cathode. The experimental arrangement can be very simple, as shown in Figure 
4.39, or can be carried out in a sophisticated semi-automatic commercial unit 
but the principle is identical. If the composition of the electrolyte and the 
operating voltage are chosen successfully a specimen in the form of a thin 
sheet not only becomes thinner but also smoother. Eventually a hole appears 
in the thin sheet and if the neighbouring regions are sufficiently smooth (i.e. 
well polished) they will be thin enough for viewing in the TEM. The process is 
shown schematically in Figure 4.40. Cooling of the electrolyte to low tempera­
tures is often employed to change the kinetics of the etching process to produce 
a smooth surface. Electropolishing was the technique used to thin the 
specimens shown in Figures 4.15, 4.17, 4.21 and 4.24. 
Automated electropolishers usually take 3 mm diameter disc samples, which 
emerge with a relatively thick rim supporting the thin central region. These 
Figure 4.39 Electropolishing as a technique for preparing thin specimens for transmission elec­
tron microscopy. At its simplest. a sheet specimen is held in tweezers in a beaker 
of electrolyte. A small potential (typically I to 30 volts) is applied between the 
specimen and a metal cathode. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp112 Electron microscopy and analysis 
(,) (b) «) 
Figure 4.40 The stages of elettropolishing a metal specimen. The thick, rough sheet (a) be­
comes smoother and thinner (b) and eventually perforates (e). The thinnest regions 
around the perforation should be suitable for examination in the TEM. 
Figure 4.41 Three types of support grid for TEM specimens. From the left are shown a plain 
mesh grid. a 'finder' grid marked with identification letters and a slot grid for 
large specimens. 
discs fit directly into the spccimen holder of the microscope (Figure 4.4(0». 
Foils prepared by hand will generally need to be supported on a 3 mm grid 
made of copper or an alternative material which will not interfere with analysis. 
Figure 4.41 shows a number of types of grid. 
There are many variants of the basic electropolishing technique but they 
share the common feature that they thin a sheet of metal from about 0·1 mm 
thick to perhaps 0·1 11m in a few minutes. The preparation of a foil from a thin 
metal sheet is therefore quite rapid, although it may have taken longer to 
machine or grind it to the starling thickness of 0·1 mm. 
A major limitation of electropolishing is that it cannot tackle non-conduct­
ing materials. Chemical thinning, using mixtures of acids without an applied 
potential, is therefore frequently used for ceramics, glasses and semiconduc­
tors. There are a wide variety of tcchniques in use, but it is usually true that the 
specimen is thinned from one side only. A common technique is to mount a 
3 mm disc, usually ground mechanically to a thickness of around 100 11m, onto 
an inert stub (often PTFE) using a lacquer which is not affected by the etchanl. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 113 
The stub is either immersed in the etehant or a very fine jet of etehant is 
directed at the centre of the specimen until a small hole appears at its centre, 
usually within a few minutes. The finished sample is removed from the stub by 
dissolving the lacquer in a solvent, and then washed in several changes of 
solvent to remove all traces of the lacquer. Rotation is often used to produce 
an even etch across the specimen. The technique is commonly employed for 
semiconductor specimens, using 1:5 hydrofluorie:nitric acid for silicon and Cl 
or Br in methanol for most I II-V and II-VI type semiconductors. 
When the specimen comprises more than one material, for example thin 
layers deposited on a substrate surface, it is often the case that one or more 
components of the structure arc resistant to the etch used for the bulk of the 
material. This can be turned to advantage in the case of very thin layers which 
arc electron transparent when the substrate is removed, but more often means 
that chemical etching of the substrate is followed by ion milling to produce a 
suitably thin specimen. 
Both chemical polishing and electropolishing enjoy the great advantage that 
they arc physically non-damaging. However, this docs not mean that they do 
not have drawbacks, since both techniques can preferentially leach out one or 
more components of an alloy or compound, causing possible inaccuracies in 
microanalysis. Also, there seems to be no simple way to predict which etchants 
or electrolytes will both polish and remove material. For example, it is quite 
possible to be able to produce a good specimen of one crystalline orientation 
and a poor one of another orientation using the same etehant. Lists of tried 
and tested solutions arc available, and new recipes arc constantly being 
developed and exchanged. 
4.5.2 Mechanical polishing 
Most materials sciencc samples will bc ground and/or polished as a first stage 
in the specimen preparation process. Grinding is usually done using paper 
which has a layer of hard partieles, often SiC, stuck onto one face. The 
paper is graded aecording to the particle size, which can vary from a sizeable 
fraction of a millimetre to only a few microns. Usually the paper is placed on a 
wheel which spins while being lubricated by flowing water. The specimen is 
mounted on a jig, often using glue or thermoplastic wax, which allows the rate 
of removal of material to be controlled. The sample is initially ground flat 
using a coarse grit, and successively finer grits are used to remove the 
damage inflicted on the sample by the previous stage. Final polishing is 
often done using diamond powder a micron or less in size, either suspended 
in oil or water or embedded in a plastic film. Even finer polishing can be 
performed using mechano-chemical means, often using colloidal silica 
particles floating in an alkaline liquid. 
When one side has been polished, the specimen must then be turned over and 
the process repeated until the specimen is thin (usually just a few micrometres). 
zzzPsgiolePfrp114 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Clearly one must be eareful not to thin the specimen away completely, and the 
final polishing stages are usually performed very carefully. Learning when to 
change from coarser to finer grinding or polishing steps for a given material 
can be a painful process; if too fine a grade of paper is used too soon much time 
will be spent at the grinding wheel, but if it is used too late the specimen will be 
useless. It is possible to thin somc materials to a micron or less in thickness 
using special polishing pads and jigs (often using a tripod of movable control 
surfaces to carefully define the polishing plane). By making the specimen in the 
form of a low angle wedge, it is even possible to make samples which arc 
electron transparent without the nced for further treatment. However, most 
samples which arc mechanically thinned need a final ion milling stage before 
they are suitable for examination (see below). The sample is usually stuck to a 
grid so that it can be handled using tweezers before it is removed from the jig 
by melting the wax or dissolving the glue. 
There arc several variations on this basic process. The technique is widely 
used for semiconductor cross-section samples, and in this case the region of 
interest usually lies less than a few microns from the top surface of the sample. 
This usually means that sacrificial material has to be glued on top of the sample 
to preserve the device layers. It is also common in such cases that a very specific 
region has to be examined, and in this case the first grind and polish step has to 
be performed very carefully so that the region of interest will lie in the electron 
transparent region of the sample. Tools ha ve also been designed which thin the 
sample using a small wheel used edge-on and a grinding or polishing slurry, 
which gives a thick rim around the edge of the sample and added mechanieal 
stability. 
4.5.3 Ion and atom milling 
If a beam of energetic ions or atoms is directed at a solid, atoms can be 
knocked out and this process, known as spulfering, can be used to thin 
specimens. A beam of ions or atoms can be generated in a vacuum using iOIl 
or atolll gum. There arc two types of gun which arc commonly used to thin 
TEM specimens; those using a gas souree (usually argon) and field emission ion 
guns, which use liquid gallium. The laller arc generally restricted to focused ion 
beam microscopes, which arc described below. There arc a variety of gas source 
ion and atom guns, but all rely on the ability of a very high electric field 
(typically \-5 kV) to generate a plasma in a low pressure gas by stripping 
one or more electrons from the atoms. The electric field can also be used to 
accelerate the ions through an aperture in the cathode, producing a beam 
which is directed onto the TEM sample. Two guns are usually present, so 
that the sample can be thinned from both sides at once. As in electropolishing, 
thinning usually proceeds until a small hole in the specimen is produced, which 
has edges sufficiently thin for TEM investigation. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 115 
The sample is usually rotated or oseillated to prevent surface roughness from 
developing, and if the ions make an angle of less than ten degrees to the surface 
it is possible to reduce problems due to different ion milling rates in specimens 
containing several different materials. The rate of removal varies with beam 
energy, incidence angle and the material being eroded, but is typically a few 
mierons an hour. Many ion milling machines have automatic termination 
deteetors, which switeh off the ion guns when a hole appears in the sample, 
and liquid nitrogen cooling of the sample to reduce the effects of heating from 
the ion beam. Some degree of control over the ion beam can be obtained using 
eleetrostatic lenses, allowing specific areas of a speeimen to be thinned. 
4.5.4 Focused ion beam (FIB) microscopes 
By applying a suitable electric field to molten gallium under vacuum, it is 
possible to make the liquid droplet form an extremely sharp point. Just as in 
the case of field emission electron guns, gallium ions can be extracted from the 
tip -which may be only a few nm wide -and accelerated down an evacuated 
column using a potential of tens of kilovolts. Since the energy of the ions is very 
well defined and the source size is very small, such field emissio/l ion gUlls can be 
used to produce a beam which is only a few nm wide by using an aperture and a 
demagnifying lens in exactly the same way as a fine electron beam is produced 
in a scanning electron microscope. Secondary electrons are emitted from the 
sample where the ions impinge, and so by scanning the ion beam it is possible 
to obtain an image of the sample, i.e. to make a jocl/setl iOIl heam (FIB) 
microscope. Such fine control of the ion beam allows incredibly precise TEM 
sections to be manufactured simply by scanning the beam over regions which 
are to be removed. This is widely used in the semiconductor industry as a 
failure analysis tool, since, for example, an individual contact in a specific 
transistor can be sectioned by the focused ion beam microscope and 
examined using TEM -the only technique which can image structures on 
the nanometer scale commonly used in state-of-the-art semiconductor devices. 
There are of course drawbacks in using a microscope which removes 
material from the sample while it is being examined. If the region of interest 
is next to the surface, then it must be protected by a deposited layer to prevent 
damage from the ion beam. This can be done in the FI B microscope by intro­
ducing a metal-organic gas next to the specimen, which decomposes in the ion 
beam and deposits metal on the sample surface wherever the beam is placed. 
(The main use of FI B microscopes apart from TEM specimen preparation is 
'rewiring' of semiconductor circuits by cutting the existing metal tracks and 
depositing new ones.) Depositing the metal in the FI B can in itself produce 
artefacts. since the metal ions are aecelerated by the ion beam and can cause 
amorphization of the sample next to the surface, and so it may be wise 10 
deposit some layer on the surface prior to FIB machining. Another 
drawback is that the rate of removal of material is relatively slow, which 
zzzPsgiolePfrp116 Electron microscopy and analysis 
(. ) (b) 
«) (d) 
Figure 4.42 The stages in preparation of a AB-machined TEM cross-section. (a) The sample is 
mechanically thinned to approx. IOOfim and the region ci interest identified. A 
layer ci Pt is then deposited over this area (dark) by introducing a metal-organic 
gas next to the specimen. which decomposes in the focused ion beam. (b) Material 
is removed from either side of the region of interest using a high intensity ion 
beam. (c) Material is progressiv ely removed using a lower intensity ion beam until 
only a thin membrane is left. (d) An actual AB-machined specimen. 
mcans that samplcs still require mechanical thinning to a few tens of microns 
before thc final Fl B section is madc. Figure 4.42 (schematically) shows the 
different stagcs in focused ion beam TEM specimen preparation and an 
example of a Fl BfTEM section where a specific region has been thinned to 
electron transparency. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 117 
4.5.5 Cleaving 
If the specimen to be examined is a brillie single crystal, it is possible to obtain 
a small amount of electron transparent material by (carefully) breaking it. 
Most crystals will prefer to break, or clea)'e, on particular planes. If the 
material is sufficiently perfect, the surfaces produced by cleaving can be 
smooth on an atomic level and free of any damage. The symmetry of the 
crystal usually ensures that two of these planes will meet at an angle of 90 
degrees or less, and so when the crystal is cleaved on these planes there will be 
some thin area along the edge which can be examined in the TEM. The 
technique is widely used to measure the thickness of epitaxial semiconductor 
layers; an example is shown in Figure 4.43. 
A good cleave is generally obtained by thinning the sample to about 100 11m, 
and using a fine pointed diamond scribe to mark the surface, which acts as the 
nucleation site for the crack which propagates through the sample. The sample 
is broken either by pressing a scalpel on its edge, or by turning the sample over 
and pressing on the opposite surface above the seribe mark using the point of a 
pair of tweezers. The second cleave is made in a similar manner to the first and 
the sample is glued onto a grid so that the cleaved edge ean be examined in the 
TEM. The success rate -two perfectly cleaved surfaces -can vary from about 
30% when performed manually to close to 100% when using a specially 
designed cleaving machine. The drawbacks of a cleaved specimen are a very 
limited thin area and unsuitability for microanalysis (due to the large amount 
of material close to the thin region, which will give strong X-ray fluorescence), 
as well as poor control over the position of the thin region. The advantages arc 
very rapid specimen preparation in comparison with mechanical polishing and 
ion milling -it is possible to make a specimen and examine it in the microscope 
Figure 4.43 (0) An SEM image of a cleaved edge TEM specimen. (b) A dark field 002 image of the 
specimen in (0) showing the layer structure. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp118 Electron microscopy and analysis 
within half an hour -and a very rigid spccimen which gives uniform diffraction 
conditions. 
Thin layers deposited on almost any substrate which will cleave rather than 
tear can be examined using low angle cleaving. In this technique, the first cleave 
is made as usual, but the second cleave is forced to take a particular direction 
by scribing a line making an angle of only a few degrces to the firs\. This can 
produce thin areas a few ~m wide, and can be applicd to amorphous substrates 
such as glass. Cleaving under liquid nitrogcn can be used to produce brill Ie 
fracturc in metal layers which are ductile at room tcmperature. 
4.5.6 Ultramicrotomy 
An ultramicr otome is a dclicate slicing instrument developed from the larger­
scale devices uscd for cUlling tissue sections for biological light microscopy. In 
an ultramicrot ome a firmly mounted or embedded specimen with an area less 
than I mm x I mm is moved past a fixed knife of glass or diamond. This is 
shown schematically in Figure 4.44. The resulting slices are collccted in a 
liquid-filled trough and are mounted on grids before being inserted into the 
mIcroscope. 
Ultra microtomy can be applied to many types of sample in addition to the 
traditional tissue sections. It is now widely used to prepare polymers for TEM 
and is increasingly being employed to cut metal sections. Despite the obvious 
introduction of mechanical damage (such as dislocations) by a cUlling 
technique, chemical information is generally rctained. In other words there is 
minimal redistributi on of the elements of the specimen during cUlling and 
analytical microscopy can therefore be successful. For example an ultramicro­
tome was used to section embedded aluminium alloy powders in order to 
Epoxy block 
Trough 
Figure 4.44 The principle of ultramicrotomy. The specimen in its epoxy block is moved steadily 
past a freshly broken glass edge (the glass 'knife). The thin sections float in the 
liquid-filled trough. A diamond can be used as an alternative knife. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp• , • The transmission electron microscope 119 
~ -~ 
~ '--. ,-
Figure 4.45 A microtomed section of an aluminium alloy particle. The powder was embedded 
in epoxy resin before sectioning. An extinction contour can be seen at the left of 
the particle. while small precipitates are visible in the lower third of the specimen. 
investigate elemental segregation (or the lack of it) introduced by rapid solidi­
fication (Figure 4.45). 
Many specimens need to be embedded in resin before sectioning, in order to 
provide support during eUlling. The preparation of a thin section may 
therefore take a substantial time, although the actual section cUlling takes 
only a few minutes. The operation of an ultramicrotome is highly skilled and 
needs 10 be carried out by an expert. 
4.5.7 Replication 
There is a further method of looking at both biological and non-biological 
material using the TEM. This is historically a very early method and consists 
of making a replica of the surface of a spccimen rather than trying to thin the 
whole piece to electron transparency. This can be donc surprisingly easily by 
depositing a thin layer of carbon (or a few othcr materials) from a source in 
vacuum. Carbon in an essentially atomic form can be obtained either by 
striking an arc between two carbon rods or spullering from a block of 
graphite. The atomic carbon so produced is deposited on all the surfaces of 
the vacuum chamber with a line of sight to the source, including the specimen. 
A very thin layer (only a few tens of nanometres thick) is allowed to build up 
before the deposition is stopped. The film can be removed from the surface in 
pieces I mm square or larger by floating it onto liquid and then mounted on a 
copper grid for examination in the microscope. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp120 Electron microscopy and analysis 
• \ . 
• • • • 
• 
• • , .. • 
• • • 
Figure 4.46 An extraction replica showing aluminium nitride particles extracted from a steel 
(T. N. Baker. Strathclyde University). 
The surface structure is revealed either by the different thickness of carbon 
deposited on the different facets of the surface, or by a sccond deposition of a 
heavy metal (e.g. platinum) deposited at a glancing angle to the surface. This 
technique has been almost completely superseded by scanning probe micros­
copy (see Chapter 7), which can examine surfaces more quickly, accurately and 
dircctly. However, an extension of the technique , the extraction replica, is still 
widely useful. I f the sample contains a finely divided second phase which can be 
revealed by etching, then particles can be extracted from the sample onto the 
replica. The extraction thus contains information about the size, shape and 
distribution of the particles in the original sample. Since the particles are 
present in the replica they can be studied using electron diffraction or any of 
the analysis techniques discussed in Chapter 6. An extraction replica from a 
steel is shown in Figure 4.46. 
A very similar proccdure to that used for making replicas is used to producc 
thin carbon films to support fine powders in the TEM. I f the carbon is deposited 
on a glass slide it is almost featurcless and can be removed in pieces large enough 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe transmission electron microscope 121 
to cover a 3 mm support grid. Very fine partieles can be examined if they are 
held in the microscope on such a support film. 
4.6 Questions 
I List in order ofincreasingconvergcnce angle: in focus, underfocus, overfocus. 
2 What would be thc maximum wnvergcnce angle for a systcm with a 
condcnser aperture of SOmm and a C2 -specimen distance of 20mm? 
Express your answer in milliradians. 
3 In the two-lens double condenser system what elTect docs CI have on the 
minimum spot size and Ix:am convergenL"C at the specimen? 
4 The objcctive aperture is to be used to allow the unddlected beam to pass but 
to block electrons dilTracted from the (002) planes of copper. What is the 
maximum size the aperture could be? (aeu = 0·360nm, t. = 0·0037 nm, focal 
length of objcctive lens = I mm). 
5 At a magnification of one million times how large is the area of the specimen 
which you could see at one time on the 100 mm square scrcen of the TEM? 
6 Where would you eXIX-ct to sec the insertion and positioning controls 
for (a) the objective aperture (b) the selected area aperture (c) the 
wndenser aperture? 
7 Describe the dilTerence betw("Cn bright field and dark field imaging modes. 
8 What would you expect to happen to an extinction contour in a TEM image 
as the specimen is tilted? 
9 What would you expect to sec in an image of a stacking fault bounded 
by partial dislocations if: (a) g·b= I, g·R = I; (b) g'b=O, g·R = 1/3; 
(c) g·b =0, g·R = -2? 
10 What are the three primary contrast mechanisms in TEM? 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChapter 5 
The scanning electron microscope 
5.1 How it works 
The scanning electron microscope (SEM) is similar to the transmission electron 
microscope (TEM) in thaI they both employ a beam of electrons directed al the 
specimen. This means that certain fealures, such as the electron gun, condenser 
lenses and vacuum system, arc similar in both instruments. However, the ways 
in which the images arc produced and magnified arc entirely different, and 
whereas the TEM provides information about the internal structure of thin 
specimens, the SEM is primarily used 10 study the surface, or ncar surface, 
structure of bulk specimens. Figure 5.1 is a scanning micrograph showing the 
surface of a metal alloy. It is much casier for the eye to interpret this Iype of 
image than a transmission electron image. 
Figure 5.2 is a schematic diagram showing the main eomponents and the 
mode of operation of a simple SEM, and Figure 5.3 is a photograph of a 
modern instrument. 
The electron source (or gun) is usually of the tungsten filament thermionic 
emission type, although field emission gun (FEG) sources are increasingly 
being used for higher resolution (Chapter 2). The electrons arc accelerated to 
an energy which is usually between I keV and 30 keV which is considerably 
lower than the energies typical of the TEM (100-300keV). Two or three 
condenser lenses then demagnify the electron beam until, as it hits the 
specimen, it may have a diameter of only 2-10nm. 
In older instruments, the fine beam of electrons is scanned across the 
specimen by the scan coils, while a detector counts the number of low 
energy secondary electrons, or other radiation, given ofT from each point on 
the surface. At the same time, the spot ofa cathode ray tube (CRT) is scanned 
across the screen, while the brightness of the spot is modulated by the amplified 
current from the detector. The electron beam and the CRT spot are both 
scanned in a similar way to a television receiver, that is, in a rectangular set 
of straight lines known as a raster. In modern instruments. the same effect is 
achieved by digitally controlling the beam position on the sample and the 
resultant image is displayed on a computer screen. However, for simplicity 
zzzPsgiolePfrpFigure 5.1 Scanning electron micrograph of the surface ofa nickel al/oy containing dendritic 
(tree shaped) part ides of silica. 
Condenser 
lens 
Objective 
lens 
Scan 
coils 
Apel1ure v 
• ••• • ••• • ••• • ••• • ••• • ••• • ••• 
• ••• • ••• • ••• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • Electron 
gun 
• • • • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• 
• •• • ••• • ••• • ••• • ••• • ••• • ••• 
Specime n Scan 
Gon 
Amp CRT 
Waveform 
monitor 
Figure 5.2 Schematic diagram showing the main components ci a scanning electron micro­
=p<. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp124 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 5.3 A scanning elearon microscope (Camscan Ltd). 
we will generally discuss the operation of the microscope in terms of a standard 
analogue scanning system and highlight the differences found in a digital SEM. 
The mechanism by which the image is magnified is then extremely simple and 
involves no lenses at all. The raster scanned by the electron beam on the 
specimen is made smaller than the raster displayed on the CRT. The linear 
magnification is then the side length of the CRT (L) divided by the side length 
(f) of the raster on the specimen (Figure 5.4(0»). 
For example, if the electron beam is made to scan a raster \0 11m x 10l1m on 
the specimen, and the image is displayed on a CRT screen lOOmm x loomm, 
the linear magnification will be 10000 x. Alternatively, or sometimes simul­
taneously on a separate waveform monitor, the microscope can display the 
variation of signal with beam position for the current raster line, as shown in 
Figure 5.2. 
5.2 Obtaining a signal in the SEM 
In Chapter 2 we discussed the interaction of electrons with a specimen , and saw 
that in a thick specimen the energy of the incident electrons was dissipated, 
resulting in various secondary emissions from the specimen , and that some of 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 125 
Raster on CRT 
<1-, ••• " ••••• , ••••••••••••• ,. L·······,············,··, -----. 
Ra!;ter on specimen 
<I ................ I ................. -. 
(-, (0, 
Figure 5.4 (a) The electron beam scans a raster ci side I on the specimen whilst a raster of side L 
is scanned on the CRT. (b) The rasters can also be thought of as arrays of picture 
points or pixels. 
the inelastically scattered electrons were backscattered out of the specimen. 
One of the main features of the SEM is that, in principle, any radiation 
from the specimen or any measurable change in the specimen may be used 
to provide the signal to modulate the CR T and thus provide contrast in the 
image. Each signal is the result of some particular interaction between the 
incident electrons and the specimen, and may provide us with different infor­
mation about the specimen. 
Figure 5.5 shows schematically some of the signals which may be used in the 
SEM. 
All scanning electron microscopes normally have facilities for detecting 
secondary electrons and backscalfered electrons , and we will discuss their 
detection below. Of the other radiations, X-rays arc used primarily for 
chemical analysis rather than imaging, and will be discussed in detail in 
Chapter 6. Auger electrons arc of such low energy, and arc so easily 
absorbed that they require an ultra high vacuum system and specialized 
equipment for their efficient usc. Auger spectroscopy and the scanning Auger 
microscope are important surface analytical techniques which will be discussed 
in Chapter 7. The other signals have important but more specialized applica­
tions, and we will discuss thcm later in this chapter. 
We discussed the trajcctory of an elcctron through a solid in Chapter 2. 
Monte Carlo simulations such as that shown in Figurc 2.5, and also dircct 
cxperimcnts, have shown that thc electrons are scat tcred in thc speeimcn within 
a rcgion such as that shown in Figure 5.6. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp126 Electron microscop y and analysis 
X-rays 
Cathodolu minescence 
"---Incident rn,am 
.. ' Ba~h callered elcctrollS 
.. , .... . ' .. ' .. , Secondary dectrotls 
•••• .. , 
f---E BTC 
Specimen current 
Tral18m ilt~d electrons 
Figure 5.5 Some of the signals which may be used in the SEM. 
~ lncid.em hcam 
-------~7." .. ~." .. l .. \';:::=~S ~':":,"::d':ary electrons 
Backl;catt~red e\cctrons 
Figure 5.6 The interattion volume and the regions from which secondary electrons. backseat­
tered elettrons. and X-rays may be detetted. 
The region into which the electrons penetrate the specimen is known as the 
interaction volume, and throughout it, the various radiations are generated as 
a result of inelastic scaltering, although as the primary electrons lose energy the 
amount and type of the secondary radiations will alter. 
Even though radiation is generated within this volume, it will not be detected 
unless it escapes from the speeimen , and this will depend on the radiation and 
the specimen. Thus, X-rays are not easily absorbed, and most will escape from 
the specimen. Therefore, as will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 6, the 
volume of material contributing to the X-ray signal, or sampling l'o/lImf!, is of 
the same order as the interaction volume, which may be sevcral micrometres in 
diameter. Electrons will not be backsealtered out of the specimen if they have 
penetrated more than a fraction of a micrometre, and the backsealtere d signal 
zzzPsgiolePfrpRackscattcrcd 
electrons 
(,) 
(b) • Escaping 
secondary 
cicctrons The scanning electron microscope 127 
Incident 
heam 
Backscaltered 
ele~tro ns 
.l' .... 
<. 
of .• • •• l'" 
... ~ 
•• Absorbed 
.> .,--sC(;onda1)' 
electrons 
.... ~ 
•• 
Intensity of 
secondary electron emission 
o Distance from incident beam 
Figure 5.7 (a) The generation of secondary electrons. (b) The spatial distribution of secondary 
electrons. 
therefore originates from a much smaller region as shown in Figure 5.6. From 
Figure 2.11 it can be seen that the baekscattered electrons have a broad energy 
spread. Those of the highest energy arc electrons which have been scattered 
only a few times. These originate near the incident beam (A in Figure 5.7(a)) 
and are capable of giving information at high spatial resolution as well as 
yielding crystallographic information (see section 5.8). Electrons which have 
undergone multiple scattering (8 in Figure 5.7(0)) lose more energy, come from 
a larger area and therefore yield information at worse spatial resolution. 
Although secondary electrons arc generated both by the primary electrons 
entering the specimen and by the escaping backscattered electrons, the former 
are more numerous , and therefore the detected secondary electron signal 
originates mainly from a region which is little larger than the diameter of the 
incident beam, as shown schematically in Figure 5.7. When we come to discuss 
the resolution of the SEM, we will find that it is closely related to the sampling 
zzzPsgiolePfrp128 Electron microscopy and analysis 
" " -;... 0·3 
~ o 0-2 a 
(,) 
~ -o 8ackscattcrt:d 
Secondaryeicclrons ------------------------------
20 40 60 gO 
Atomic number (Z) 
" 1 -----. -- - - - --. . . . . . . . . . -. . -. . - - - -. -> 
0 
0 " -0 " " " ~ 
(b) E, £, Aaderat ing voltage 
Figure 5.8 (a) The effect of atomic number on the yield of backscatt ered elearons (TI) (after 
K. F.1. Heinrich). and secondary electrons (0) (after D. B. Wittry). (b) The effea of 
accelerating voltage on the toul electron yield (11 + 0). 
volume of the signal used. Secondary electrons, having the smallcst sampling 
volume, are therefore capable of giving a better spatial resolution than the 
other signals which we have discussed. 
The numbers of secondary and backscattered electrons emitted from the 
specimen for each incident electron are known as the secondary electron coeffi­
ciell! (0) and the backscattered electron coefficiell! (11) respectively . 
As shown in Figure 5.8(a), 11 is strongly dependent on the atomic number of 
the specimen whereas 0 is not. As shown in Figure 5.8(b), the total electron 
yield is a complex function of the accelerating voltage, with a maximum 
between I and 5 keY. As 11 is almost independent of voltage, Figure 5.8(b) 
effectively represents the voltage dependence of o. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 129 
If the electron yield is not equal to unity, then unless the sample is a 
conductor. it will tend to become charged during examination as discussed 
in section 5.11. Figure 5.8(b) indicates that careful control of the accelerating 
voltage can produce an electron yield of unity which will overcome this effect 
(sec section 5.11). 
S.2. I Detecting secondary electrons 
By far the most widely used signal in the scanning electron microscope is that 
from secondary electrons. Secondary electrons are detected by a scintillator ­
photomultiplier system known as the Everhart-Thornley detector. The 
detector is shown schematically in Figure 5.9. 
The secondary electrons strike a scintillator, e.g. a phosphor, which then 
emits light. The light is transmitted through a light pipe, and into a photo­
multiplier which converts the photons into pulses of electrons, which may then 
be amplified and used to modulate the intensity of the CRT. 
The energy of the secondary electrons (1O-50eV) is too low to excite the 
scintillator, and so they arc first accelerated by applying a bias voltage of 
'"" +\OkeV to a thin aluminium film covering the scintillator. A metal grid 
or collector, at a potential of several hundred volts, surrounds the scintillator 
and this has two purposes. First it prevents the high voltage of the scintillator 
affecting the incident electron beam, and secondly, it improves the collection 
efficiency by attracting secondary electrons , and thus collecting even those 
which were initially not moving towards the detector, as shown in 
Pbotomultiplier Scintillator 
(biased to lOkeV) 
• • • • 
Light 
guide Grid 
(0 200 V) Iucident 
Be 
Figure 5.9 Schematic representation ci the Everhart-Thornley secondary electron detector. 
showing the paths of secondary (SE) and backscatt ered (BE) electrons. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp130 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 5.9. The Everhart-Thornley detector system is very efficient. and for 
flat specimens, almost all the secondary electrons arc collected. 
5.2.2 Detecting backscattered electrons 
Backscattered electrons which arc travelling in the appropriate direction will of 
course hit the scintillator of the Everhart-Thornley detector and be detected. 
Therefore we should note that the signal discussed in the previous section is not 
purely due to secondary electrons as it docs contain a small backscattered 
component. If the scintillator bias is switched ofT, or the collector given a 
small negative voltage, then secondaries arc exeluded from the detector, and 
the backscattered signal is obtained. However, only those electrons travelling 
along the direct line of sight towards the detector will be collected, and thus the 
geometric efficiency is very low. This method of detection is now rarely used, 
and most microscopes arc fitted with purpose built backscattered electron 
detectors, which can be of three types. 
Scintillator detectors 
Thcse detectors arc of the scintillator /light pipe/photomultiplier type, and arc 
designed to maximize the solid angle of collection. A good example of this is 
the Robinson detector shown schematically in Figure 5.10(a). The advantage 
of these detectors is their rapid response time, which means that, like the 
Everhart-Thornley detector. they may be used in conjunction with rapid 
scan rates. However, they arc bulky, and may restrict the working distance 
of the microscope, and may need to be retracted if, for example, it is necessary 
to detect X-rays. 
Solid-state detectors 
When a high-energy electron impinges on a semiconductor, it produces many 
electron-hole pairs. Normally these will rapidly recombine, but if a voltage is 
applied to the semiconductor, for example, by the self-bias generated by a P-N 
junction, then they may be separated, thus producing a current, which can 
subsequently be amplified. Figure 5.10(b) is a schematic diagram of such a 
detector. The detector is usually in the form of a thin flat plate, which is 
mounted on the objective polepiece, and thus docs not interfere with normal 
operation of the instrument. The detector consists of up to four such elements 
whose outputs may be measured independently. The main disadvantage of a 
solid-state detector is its relatively slow response time, and hence its unsuit­
ability for rapid scan rates. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpBackscatten:d 
electrons 
(. ) 
.......... , , , , , , , , , 
'" amplifier 
(b) Specimen 
Lens 
polepiecc The scanning electron microscope 131 
Ught guide to 
photomu ltipli~r 
Si with 
=::~i:===- P·N junction = Au layer 
Figure 5./0 (0) A large area, Robinson type scintillator detector. (b) A solid state silicon 
detector with two elements A and B. 
Through-the-Iens detectors 
In high resolution SEMs a different type of eleetron detection system is 
sometimes used. Such instruments have speeially designed objeetive lenses 
with very largc magnetic fields and low spherical aberration and the sample 
may be placed within the strong magnetic field of the lens. A scintillator 
detcctor is placcd within the lens and backscallcred and secondary electrons 
pass upwards through the lens to this detector. Such a system has a very good 
collection efficiency and allows the microscope to operate at very short working 
distances. However in some instruments such an arrangement places severe 
restrictions on the size and movement of the sample. 
5.3 The optics of the SEM 
The purpose of the lenses in the SEM is to producc a fine beam of electrons 
incident on the specimen. Figure 5.11 is a simplified ray diagram of a micro­
scope which has two lenses, a condenser lens and an objective lens. We can 
understand the main features of the microscope by treating the electromagnetic 
zzzPsgiolePfrp132 Electron microscopy and analysis 
v 
"' 
" 
"' 2. 
(WO) 
Figure 5.11 Ray diagram of a two-lens SEM. COn<knser tens 
Scan coits 
Stan coits 
Objective tens 
and apcrlurc (A) 
Specimen 
lenses as thin convex optical lenses, and using geometrie optics theory. For the 
moment, we will ignore lens defeets. You might find it useful to study the 
MATTE R software module, 'Introduetion to Electron Microscopes' if you 
are unfamiliar with geometrical optics. 
The electron gun (Chapter 2) produces a monochromatic beam of eleetrons, 
with a current in the beam of 10. The condenser lens, of focallength j", collects 
most of these electrons and produces a demagnified image of the filament at a 
distance Vj from the condenser lens. If the diameter of the filament is do then 
the diameter of the intermediate filament image (lid is given by 
( 5. I ) 
and Vj is obtained from the thin lens formula, equation 1.1. The objective lens 
offocallength io is used to further demagnify the filament image, producing a 
probe of diameter d on the surface of the specimen, which is a distance V2 below 
the objective lens. The distance V2 is known as the working distance (WD) of 
the microscope. 
The diameter of the final probe on the specimen is then 
( 5.2) 
It can be seen that if the strength of the condenser lens is increased, Vj 
decreases, and the intermediate beam diameter dt decreases. Also "2 must 
increase, as 112 + Vj is constant, and therefore the demagnifieation of the 
objective also increases , and the probe diameter decreases. The probe size in 
the SEM is therefore regulated by altering the strength of the condenser lens. 
For a constant condenser lens setting, equation 5.2 shows that the probe 
diameter also decreases as the working distance is decreased. 
In order to minimize spherical aberration (Chapter 2), the entry of rays into 
the objective lens is restricted by an aperture of diameter A, and therefore, as 
zzzPsgiolePfrpv The scanning electron microscope I)) 
Condenser lens 
Scan coil. 
Sean coils 
Objeclive lens 
and aperture 
Specimen 
Figure 5. / 2 Scanning of the elearon beam by two sets of coils so that the beam always passes 
through the optic axis of the objeaive lens. 
may be seen from Figure 5.11, not all of the electron beam which passes 
through the condenser lens can enter the objective lens. If the semi-angle of 
the rays leaving the condenser lens is (lo, and the semi-angle of the rays entering 
the objective lens is Cl!. then the current in the final probe is 
( 5.3) 
The current therefore decreases as the condenser lens strength increases (i.e. as 
the probe becomes smaller), and also decreases as the aperture diameter (A) is 
reduced. 
When we come to consider the ultimate resolution of the SEM, we will find 
that the probe size, and the current in the probe, play important roles in 
determining the performance of the microscope. 
Deflection of the beam is accomplishcd by energizing a pair of coils as shown 
schematically in Figure 5.12. In order to scan a raster, two orthogonal pairs of 
coils arc required. The SEM normally has two such sets of coils, which arc set 
to deflect the beam in opposite directions. Thus, as seen in Figure 5.12, the 
beam scans across the specimen, but always passes through the optic axis at the 
objective lens. 
5.4 The performance of the SEM 
S.4.1 Pixels 
The process of image formation in the scanning electron microscope is quite 
unlike the formation of an image in the optical or transmission electron micro­
scope, as the image is built up sequentially during the scan. A very useful 
concept in understanding the imaging performance of the SEM is that of the 
picf1lre elell/em or pixel. In an analogue SEM, the amplified signal from the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp134 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Incident electron beam 
0::11 rrIJI 01 ::rrIIJI 01 TIl IIJ 
Specimen pi~els 
l'l lbl l'l 
Figure 5.13 The relationship between the electron beam diameter and the size of the specimen 
pixels. 
deteetor is output to a high quality cathode ray tube, and the minimum size of 
spot which may be obtained on such a CRT is typically ""' 0·1 mm (100 ~Im). A 
100mm square CRT, such as is used for photographic image recording can 
therefore contain \000 x \000 discrete picture elements or pixels. In a digital 
SEM the image will be recorded on a framestore which may contain a similar 
number of pixels. As shown in Figure 5.4, the spot on the CRT (or the 
framestore pixel) mimics the movement of the electron beam on the 
specimen, and therefore for each of the pixels on the CRT there is a corre­
sponding pixel on the specimen (Figure 5.4(b)). The size of the specimen pixel 
(1') is given by 
100 
p~-"m M 
where AI is the magnification. ( 5.4) 
Now the resolution was defined in Chapter I as the smallest separation of 
two points that the microscope can detect as separate entities. It is dear that in 
order to resolve two features, e.g. A and B in Figure 5.4(b), they must oecupy 
separate pixels. Therefore, the working resolution of the instrument can be no 
better than the specimen pixel size p as given by equation 5.4. 
The size of the electron probe relative to the specimen pixel size is very 
important. 
If the electron probe is larger than the specimen pixel (Figure 5. I 3(a)), then 
the signal from adjacent pixels is merged, and the resolution is degraded. If the 
electron probe is smaller than the specimen pixel (Figure 5.13 (b)) then the 
signal will be weaker, and, as we will discuss later, may be noisy. It is clear that 
for optimum performance of the instrument, we should in general aim to make 
the probe diameter (or more correctly the .wimpling I'olwlle as discussed in 
section 5.2) equal to the specimen pixel diameter (Figure 5. I 3(c)). This 
means that for optimum performance, the probe size should be adjusted as 
the magnification of the microscope is altered. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 135 
5.4.2 Depth of ~eld 
Apart from its good spatial resolution, one of the most important aspects of 
the scanning electron microscope is its large depth of field. If we compare 
images taken by an optical microscope and an SEM of the same object, at 
similar magnifications, as in Figure 5.14, then the difference is striking. 
The important consequences of the large depth of field of the SEM cannot be 
overemphasized. As an example, over the past thirty years the SEM has con­
tributed greatly to our understanding of fracture processes by providing a 
means of examining fracture surfaces at high resolution. 
Figure 1.11 shows the electron beam emerging from the objective aperture 
(diameter A) and incident on a specimen. Although the beam is focused on the 
specimen, the convergence angle iJ. is small, and, assuming a point focus, the 
beam diameter defocuses by less than s over a vertical distance of I" where 
s = hiJ. ( 5.5) 
If the defocus is no greater than a specimen pixel, then the image will remain in 
focus, and thus from equations 5.4 and 5.5, the distance h over which the 
specimen will remain in focus, the depth of field, is given by 
I o. I 
1= mm At" ( 5.6) 
From Figure 5.11, we sec that the convergence angle iJ. of the beam is given by 
"~ 2WD ( 5.7) 
Thus from equations 5.6 and 5.7, we find that the depth of field is 
I 0·2WD 
I = AM mm ( 5.8) 
For typical values of aperture diamcter of 100 ~Im, and a working distance of 
20mm, equation 5.8 shows that at a magnification of 1000x, the depth offield 
is 40 ~Im. By comparison, an optical microscope working at a magnification of 
1000x with an objective lens of numerical aperture of 0·7 would have a depth 
of field of only,...., I ~Im. You can experiment with these variables in the 
MATTER module, 'Using the Scanning Electron Microscope'. 
5.5 The ultimat e resolution ofthe SEM 
We saw in the last section that the best working resolution of the SEM was the 
specimen pixel size p, given by equation 5.4, and that this depended on the 
magnification of the instrument. However, this resolution is only achieved if 
the diameter of the beam sampling volume is no larger than p. As discussed in 
section 5.2, and shown in Figure 5.6, the sampling volume depends on the 
signal being used. For example X-rays have large sampling volumes which 
zzzPsgiolePfrp{,) 
{b) 
Figure 5./4 Particles of rapidly solidified aluminium alloy powder. (a) Imaged in the optical 
microscope (numerical aperture = 065). (b) Seen in the scanning elearon micro­
scope. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 137 
are comparable with the total interaction volume, and the diameter of the 
sampling volume in this case is several micrometres. No mailer how good 
our microscope is, or how well we adjust it, we cannot achieve a spatial reso­
lution which is beller than this. Secondary electrons have the smallest sampling 
volume, with a diameter lillie larger than the probe diameter. 
However, as the probe diameter is reduced, the beam current is decreased, as 
discussed in section 5.4, and ultimately the beam current will be insufficient to 
generate a usable signal. Thus we can define the ultimate resolution of the SEM 
as being that of ,tie slIIallest probe which call provide all adequate sigllal from ,tie 
speCllllell. 
5.5.' The minimum attainable probe size 
As discussed in section 5.3, the probe size may be decreased by increasing the 
strength of the condenser lens and decreasing the working distance. However, 
the limitations on focusing the electron beam to a small spot with a lens are 
identical to those which limit the resolution of images in the TEM (chapter 1 
and equations 1.7-1.9). As the working distance decreases the beam conver­
gence angle iJ. increases (Figure 5.11). Rays which are off the optic axis are 
subject to spherical aberration and instead of a point focus on the specimen, we 
obtain a disc of diameter d." where 
( 5.9) 
where c.. is the coefficient of spherical aberration of the lens. 
There is also aberration introduced by diffraction at the aperture (Chapter 
I), which, for electrons of wavelength ,., limits the minimum spot size to 
d" = 1·22AjiJ. (5.10) 
If the microscope is adjusted so as to give a probe of the theoretical diameter 
d
" aecording to equation 5.2. then this value will be increased by the aberra­
tions d., and d". The real probe size d may then be taken as 
The minimum value of (I, corresponding to the case when (I, 
minimizing the aberrations, and is given by 
,. -K)'I'C'I' lmm -• $ 
where the constant K is about unity. (5.11) 
= 0, is obtained by 
(5.12) 
For a typical SEM, operating at 20 keY, with an objective lens of 
c.. = 20 mm, dmin is 2·3 nm, and Cl = 5·1 X 10-3 radians. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp138 Electron microscopy and analysis 
As discussed in section 5.3, as the probe diameter (d) is decreased, so the 
current (I) in the beam decreases. The relationship between these parameters is 
given by Pease and Nixon, for a thermionic emission filament, as 
[ (IT) j'/' d= dmin 7·92 X [09 j + I (5.13) 
where T is the filament temperature and j is the current density at the filament 
surface. 
5.5.2 The minimum usable beam current 
In order to resolve two points on the specimen, there must be a discernibl e 
difference between the signals from these two regions. 
Figure 5. I 5(a) shows how the intrinsic signal from the specimen might vary 
with scan position. If we compare the signal Sma' from one point of the 
specimen, with the signal S from an adjacent point, then the contrast from 
the specimen C, which lies between 0 and I, and is sometimes called the lIall/ral 
COllfraSI, is defined as 
c = (Sma., -S) = dS 
Sma Sma (5.14) 
Now the signal that is detected in the SEM is not a continuous signal, but for 
each pixel is derived from the number of secondary electrons II arriving at the 
detector in a fixed time period. Because these events are randomly distributed 
in time, simple statistical theory tells us that if the average number of electrons 
detected from a particular point on the specimen is ii, then iI will vary by an 
amount up to ..j'-I about the mean. The noise N is then defined as ..jil. 
In a real situation therefore, the variation of signal with scan position will be 
as shown in Figure 5.15(b), with the noise tending to obscure the natural 
contrast of the specimen. Whether or not the observer can detect the two 
points of interest, i.e. whether they can see the contrast, is a physiological 
problem. 
Sm,,, 
t 
!1S 
S t 
I') 1') 
Figure 5.15 (0) Idealized signal waveform showing contrast. (b) A similar signal with noise. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 139 
Rose has determined that the human eye can only distinguish two points on 
a CRT if 
fiS > 5N I!.S > 5Jii (5.15) 
We can use this criterion to determine the minimum level of contrast which can 
be observed. You can experiment with your own perception of contrast in the 
MA ITER module "Image Fundamentals'. Combining equations 5.14 and 5.15, 
we find that the minimum level of contrast which can be observed is given by 
5 C>-Vii (5.16) 
The minimum level of signal necessary for us to observe a contrast level of C in 
the specimen is 
(5.17) 
We can relate n, the mean number of electrons detected for each pixel to the 
operating conditions of a microscope with a beam current I and a frame scan 
time F. 
If we assume, as before, that we have a CRT or framestore of 1000 x lOoo 
pixel resolution (total of \{)6 pixels), then the time t that the beam dwells on a 
particular pixel is Fx 10-6. The number of electrons (of charge e) which enter 
the specimen in this time is therefore 
It IF x 10-6 
110=-= , e (5.18) 
The number of electrons actually detected /I will depend on the beam-specimen 
interaction (Chapter 2), and the efficiency of the detector. We can write 
/I = qllo (5.19) 
where q is the product of the detector efficiency and the electron yield. For 
secondary electrons , the former is approximately unity, and the laller is ,,",0.1-
0.2. giving a value for q of between 0·1 and 0·2. 
By combining equations 5.17, 5.18 and 5.19, and pUlling e = 1·6 x 10-19 C, 
we can now express the Rose criterion in terms of the critical current I,., which 
is required to discern a contrast level C in the specimen as 
4 X 10-12 
Ie > amperes qFC2 (5.20) 
We can sec from this equation that for a given detection system, there is a 
minimum beam current req uired to observe a particular contrast level, and that 
this current increases as the frame scan time decreases. 
If we substitute /,. obtained from equation 5.20 into equation 5.13, then we 
can predict the minimum probe size, and therefore the best resolution obtain­
able in terms of a given contrast level in the specimen. This is shown 
zzzPsgiolePfrp140 Electron microscopy and analysis 
1000 
"'-
"-... 
"-... 
'-... " , •• 10 
.ii 0 " ~ 
. 05 
Contrnst F 
F 
F 
F O.02s 
.. Is 
10~ 
IOOs 
1 
Figure 5. /6 The minimum size of probe which may be used to observe a given level of contrast 
in the signal, as a function ci the frame scan time. The microscope parameters for 
which these relationships hold are discussed in the text. 
graphically in Figurc 5.16, for a typical SEM using secondary electrons. The 
effect of frame scan time F is also shown, for Fvarying between 100 s, which is 
a realistic value for image recording (see section 5. 10) and 0·02 s which is the 
television scan rate. 
In constructing this graph, the following parameters have been assumed: 
q=0.2,j=4A/cm2, T=2800K, C=20mm, E=20keV 
Although elcctron microscope manufacturers will specify the ultimate resolu­
tion of an instrument, it is important to realize that this is for a contrast value 
of unity, which will only be obtained in an ideal specimen. As may be seen from 
Figure 5.16, for specimcns of low natural contrast the ultimate resolution may 
be substantially lower. 
5.5.3 High-performance microscopes 
In discussing the performance of the scanning electron microscope so far, we 
have based our calculations on the parameters and operating conditions of a 
typical SEM with a tungsten filament and an objective lens c.. of 20 mm, which 
will have an ultimate resolution of around 5 nm. The discussions above have 
shown that the resolution of the SEM is limited by the spherical aberration of 
the objective lens and by the beam current, and substantially beller resolution 
than this can be achieved by improving one or both of these parameters. 
The coefficient of spherical aberration of a good TEM objective lens is 
typically 2 mm. By pUlling scan coils into a TEM, then extremely good 
spatial resolution can be achieved, albeit at the cost of limiting the specimen 
size. The resolution of such a TEMjSEM instrument is of the order of 
2nm. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 141 
An alternative is to use a higher brightness electron gun and LaB6 filaments 
(ten times brighter) or field emission sources (loo times brighter) may be used. 
Field emission gun microscopes (FEGSEM) which have spatial resolutions 
approaching ""' I nm are now readily available and such systems have a 
number of other advantages including a much improved performance at low 
accelerating voltages. 
5.6 Topographic images 
One of the principal uses of the scanning electron microscope is to 
study the surface features, or topogrtlpf,y, of a sample. The discussion in the 
previous sections has shown that in order to obtain an image in the micro­
scope, we must have some variation in the signal obtained from different paris 
of the specimen. 
Although topographic images may be obtained using most signals, we will 
only consider the use of secondary and backscallered electrons. The back­
scallered electron coefficient '1 and the secondary electron coefficient 8, arc 
both a minimum when the surface of the specimen is perpendicular to the 
electron beam. This is because of the shape of the interaction volume and its 
relationship to the surface of the specimen, as shown in Figure 5.17. As the 
specimen is tilted, electrons are increasingly likely to be scallered out of the 
specimen, rather than further into the specimen. 
The secondary electron coefficient varies with the tilt of the specimen 0, as 
\) = 8oseeO. Therefore, more secondaries are produced from tilted regions of 
the specimen. As the efficiency of the Everhart-Thornley detector is not very 
sensitive to the trajectories of the secondary electrons, we expect the number of 
detected electrons therefore to increase with surface tilt. It is partly for this 
reason that specimens being studied for topographic contrast dctector arc 
usually tilted some 20-40 degrccs towards the detector (Figure 5.9). 
Topographic images obtained with secondary electrons, such as Figure 5.1, 
look remarkably like images of solid objects viewed with light. As we arc 
accustomed to this sort of image, we find these topographic images easy to 
interpret. This similarity arises because of the very strong analogy between the 
two imaging modes. Figure 5.18(0) shows a schematic diagram of a surface 
under diffuse lighting conditions. 
Light is arriving from almost all directions so that whatever the orientation 
of each of the faeets A, Band C some light is reflected towards the eye. Figure 
5.18(c) shows the analogous situation for secondary electrons in the SEM. The 
only major difference is that the electrons are travelling in the opposite 
direction to the light rays. The specimen in the SEM thercfore appears as if 
we were looking at it from above, when it is being illuminated with diffuse light, 
the detector being the source of the diffuse light. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp(" 
(bl 
«I 
Figure 5. / 7 The effect of beam tilt on the interaction volume and on the backscattering coeffi­
cient (Tll of aluminium at 2OkeV. The figures were produced using the SEM 
module of the MAnER sc:itware suite. (a) Tilt = 0", '1 = 0. 13. (b) Tilt = 40", 
'1 = 0.21. (c) Tilt = 80",11 = 0.55. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 143 
A 
, .. ," c 
(.) (b) 
«) (~ 
Figure 5. /8 The analogy between the eye and the SEM. The four diagrams show the same speci­
men viewed under dtfferent conditions. (0) Diffuse illumination viewed by the eye 
(looking down from the top of the page). (b) Direct illumination viewed by the 
eye. (c) The equivalent of (0) in the SEM (secondary electrons). (d) The equivalent 
of (b) in the SEM (backscattered electrons). 
Figure 5.19(a), whieh shows a faceted fracture surface viewed in the SEM 
with secondary electrons, is typical of the topographic images of interest to 
materials scientists. 
It is possible to obtain even more information about the specimen if 
stereomicroscopy is used. This is achieved by taking two pictures under 
identical conditions, except that between exposures the specimen is tilted 
by a few degrees. These then represent the views which our left and right 
eyes would see. ]fwe view the pictures so that the left eye sees the left image, 
and the right eye the right image, our brain will interpret the combined 
images as a single three-dimensional picture. The easiest way of achieving 
this is to mount the photographs side by side, so that the same feature is 
separated by about 6cm in the two photographs, and to use a special stereo 
viewer. However. with a little practice, most people can train themselves to 
get the same effect by simply relaxing the eyes so that they focus on infinity, 
and viewing the images, concentrating on a single prominent feature, whose 
two images will (hopefully) eventually combine. Figure 5.20 is a stereo pair of 
a corroded metal surface. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp(-I (bl 
Figure 5./9 Scanning electron micrographs ci the fracture surface of alumina. (a) Secondary 
electron image. (b) Same area. imaged with all four segments ci a solid state back­
scattered electron detector. (c) Same area, using only a single segment of the 
detector. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 145 
SO)1m 
Figure 5.20 A stereo pair micrograph of a corrosion pit in a powerstation condenser tube. 
The three-dimensional effect can be observed by viewing the pair of microgra phs 
using a special viewer. or, with practice, using the unaided eye. (G. Gibbs and 
1. E. Castle, University of Surrey) 
The optimum amount of tilt between the two images is typically 5-10 
degrees, but this will depend on the magnification and the height differcnees 
in the speeimcn. It is possible to obtain quantitative measurcmcnts from stcreo 
pairs by dctcrmining the relative latcral displaeemcnt or parallax p of differcnt 
regions of the imagc. Thc vertical hcight scparation fl, of two features in the 
image is given by 
h=p/2MsinO (5.21) 
where M = magnification and 0 = half the tilt angle. 
Measurements may be made directly on the micrographs. or by USlllg a 
stereometer such as is used for aerial surveying. 
Stereoscopic images may be viewed directly in the microscope in some 
instruments. This may be achieved for example by rapidly tilting the sample 
between two positions, displaying the two images in red and green and viewing 
them with appropriately coloured glasses (anaglyph technique). 
Topographic images may also be obtained using backscallered electrons. 
The yield of backscallered electrons also increases with increasing tilt angle. 
but the direction of the electrons becomes progressively more peaked in the 
forward direction as seen in Figure 5.17. As only 'line of sight' backscallercd 
electrons arc detected, this means that the number of electrons dctccted is a 
function of both the specimen and the detector gcomctries. Once again thcre is 
zzzPsgiolePfrp146 Electron microscopy and analysis 
a close analogy with viewing a specimen by eye. Figure S.18(h) shows a surface 
illuminated by a parallel beam of light such as a spot lamp. 
Only the A facets arc now correctly oriented to reflect light to the eye. Facet 
C reflects the light away from the eye, while facet B cannot even be reached by 
the illuminating beam. The analogous situation for a small backseallered 
electron detector in the SEM is shown in Figure S.18(d). The specimen in the 
SEM appears as if we were looking at it from above, when it is illuminated by a 
light source making the same solid angle with the specimen as docs the 
detector. Therefore in the SEM, a rough surface observed with backseallered 
electrons will have more shadows than the same specimen viewed with 
secondary electrons. Viewing a specimen with a multi-element backseallered 
detector (Figure S.IO(h», is similar to viewing a specimen with a ballcry of 
spotlights. If we use all thc (four) scgmcnts, thcn, as shown in Figurc S.19(b), 
wc obtain an image which has a fcw morc shadows and highlights than the 
secondary electron image of Figure S.19(a). However if we only use one 
segment of the detector, as in Figure S.19(c), we obtain an image with a 
much harsher appearancc. In somc circumstan ces, it may be easier to 
interpret such an image, and to distinguish the peaks from the troughs in the 
specimen, than for the secondary electron image. 
A multi-element baekscallered electron detector may also be used to enhance 
the topographic image from a specimen which is almost flal. The clements A 
and B in Figure S.IO(h), being on opposite sides of the optic axis, will dearly 
receive different topographic signals from the specimen. If the signals from 
these clements are slIbrracted from each other, then we will obtain no 
contrast from flat regions of the specimen, but contrast from any topographic 
features will be enhanced. This mode of operation is particularly useful when 
there arc other sources of contrast in the specimen, such as compositional or 
crystallographic contrast, as these arc then suppressed. An example of this 
effect is seen in Figure S.21(a). 
Although backscallered electrons give us a very versatile approach 
to topographic imaging, we must remember that the sampling volume for 
the backscallered electrons is large, and resolution may be limited to 
",0·1 11m. 
5.7 Compositional images 
The signal from the specimen is capable of yielding information not only about 
the surface topography, but also about the composition. The secondary 
electron coefficient does not depend very much on the composition of the 
sample, although it may be sensitive 10 the surface condition and electronic 
structure of the material. However, the backscallered coefficient '1 vanes 
monotonically with atomic number Z as shown in Figure S.8(a). 
zzzPsgiolePfrp{,} 
{b} 
Figure 5.21 Backscattered images of a mechanically polished silver soldered joint. (0) 
Topograph ic contrast arising from the different resistance to abrasion of the 
phases is enhanced by subtracting the signals from the two elements of the detec­
tor. (b) By adding the signals from the two detector elements. topographic contrast 
is suppressed. and compositional contrast is enhanced . 
zzzPsgiolePfrp148 Electron microscopy and analysis 
11 is almost independent of accelerating voltage. and Heinrich has shown 
that it is given by 
11 = -0·254 +0.016Z -1·86 x 1O-4Z2 + 8·3 X 1O-7Z) (5.22) 
The backscallered coefficient from a compound or phase containing several 
clements may generally be obtained from equation 5.22 by using a rule of 
mixtures based on weight fraction, although there may be a small dependence 
of 11 on density. 
The magnitude of the compositional or aTomic I/!lmher contrast from two 
phases of backs caller cd coefficients 111 and lh. where 111> 112 is readily calcu­
lated using equation 5.14 as 
C=111-112 
'1 , (5.23) 
Table 5.1 gives some examples of atomic number contrast calculated from 
equation 5.23. It may be seen from Table 5.1 that the contrast from adjacent 
clements is quite small. typically 1-5%. and that contrast from different phases 
in an alloy may be even less. Therefore. in many systems of interest. this is a 
relatively weak form of contrast compared to topographic contrast which may 
approach 100 %. Specimens for compositional imaging should therefore pre­
ferably be polished fial. Unetched, metallographically polished specimens are 
ideal for such examination, and an example is shown in Figure 5.21. It is 
instructive to compare Figures 5.21(a) and (b) which were taken under 
identical conditions. For Figure 5.21(a), as discussed above. the detector 
signals from clements on opposite sides of the polepiece were subtracted. 
This removes the compositional contrast. but reveals the weak topographical 
contrast from the polishing scratches and hardness differences of the phases. 
Figure 5.21(b) was obtained by adding the signals from the different detector 
clements. This minimizes the topographic contrast. and enhances the atomic 
number contrast which depends only on the number of backs calle red electrons 
collected by the IOta I detector. For compositional imaging, the solid angle of 
the detector should be as large as possible. and therefore short working 
TableS.1 Atomic number contrast 
Resolution 
Phase Phase Contrast Degradation 
I Z, 2 Z, ", ", % (nm) 
AI Il Mg 12 0·153 o· 141 7·' " AI Il C, 29 0·153 0·304 49·4 5 
AI Il " 78 0·153 0·485 68' , 
C, 29 Zo 30 0·304 0·310 ,., 47 
tl-brass 29.4 p-brass 29·5 0·305 0·306 0·2 264 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 149 
distances and large active detector areas, either scintillator or solid state, are 
desirable. 
Although we may be able to detect two phases in a specimen, we may not be 
able to do so with very good spatial resolution, because, as we saw in section 
5.5, and Figure 5.16, the ultimate resolution of the instrument is dependent on 
the contrast. Having calculated the atomic number contrast from equation 
5.23, we can insert this value into equations 5.13 and 5.20, and hence 
caleulate the spatial resolution of the two phases. This figure, shown in the 
last column of Table 5.\, should be considered as a degradation of the 
resolution, beyond that of 0·\ 11m due to the limitations of the sampling 
volume. It is very noticeable that for phases with similar atomic numbers the 
resolution may be very poor. Manufactur ers of backscattercd detectors will 
usually quote a figure for the atomic number difference that their equipment 
will detect, e.g. 0,\, but, without a figure for resolution under these conditions, 
this figure is not very meaningful. 
With the advent of improved backscattercd detectors over the past few years, 
use of this imaging mode in the SEM has increased greatly, partieularly in 
eonjunction with energy dispersive X-ray detection (Chapter 6). The areas of 
eompositional interest are first identified by backscattercd imaging and the 
phase eompositions are then determined by spot analysis of the X-ray signal. 
It is possible to obtain quantitative compositional information by measuring 
the intensity of the backscattercd signal from the phase of interest, eomparing 
it with a standard element, and then using Figure 5.8(a) to obtain the atomic 
number of the phase. Although this technique is potentially valuable on 
aecount of its high spatial resolution, and for its ability to analyse phases of 
low atomic number which are not easily determined using X-rays, great eare 
must be taken to exclude other forms of eontrast, such as topographic or 
crystallographic effects, if reliable results are to be obtained. 
5.8 Crystallographic information from the SEM 
We discussed in Chapters 3 and 4 how scattering of the primary electron beam 
by a specimen might be used to form diffraction patterns or to provide contrast 
in a TEM image. We can make use of similar electron beam interactions to 
obtain crystallographic information in the SEM. 
S.B.' Channelling contrast 
The backscattered electron coefficient is dependent on the orientation of a 
crystal with respect to the incident beam. This effect. known as electron 
channel/ing, arises from the effects of diffraction on the depth of penetration 
of the primary beam into the specimen. The further the primary beam pene­
trates, the less likely are backscattered electrons to escape, and therefore the 
lower is the backscattered electron coefficient. Channelling contrast is generally 
zzzPsgiolePfrp150 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Figure 5.22 An example of channelling contrast in the backscattered image of a partly recrystal­
lized aluminium alloy. Grains or subgrains of different crystallographic orientation 
have different backscattering coefficients and are therefore imaged at different 
grey levels. 
much wcaker than atomic number contrast, and may only be satisfacto rily 
obtained with a good backscallcred electron dctector, a carcfully preparcd 
specimen which must not have a deformed surface layer such as is introduced 
by mechanical polishing, and optimization of the microscope operating con­
ditions. In particular, the electron beam must be reasonably parallel, and have 
a largc current. 
Channelling contrast images are intermediate in spatial resolution between 
optical and TEM images and arc of particular use for the study of the grain 
and subgrain microstructurcs developed during the processing of metals and 
other crystalline materials. Because the contrast arises from Bragg diffraction, 
only electrons which have lost lillie or no energy and which, thcrefore , 
originate elose to the point of impact of the elcctron beam (A in Figure 
5.7(a» contribute to the contrast and thercfore the loss of spatial resolution 
due to scallcring within the sample (Figure 5.6) is quite low. The spatial reso­
lution is optimum for low accelerating voltages and large atomic number. For 
example, in aluminium at 8-10 keY the spatial resolution for a channelling 
contrast image such as that of Figure 5.22 is '"" 100nm in a W-filamcnt SEM 
and""' 10nm in a FEGSEM. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 151 
S.B.2 Diffraction potterns 
Although we cannot obtain diffraction spot patterns in the SEM, as we can in 
the TEM, we can make use of electron channelling to form diffraction patterns. 
An early technique involved rocking the electron beam over a point on the 
specimen to produce 'selected area channelling patterns'. However, this 
technique has now been superseded by electron backscatter diffraction 
(EBSD) which is rapidly developing into an important analytical tool. The 
microscope arrangement for EBSD is shown schematically in Figure 5.23(0). 
The specimen, which should be prepared as described above, so as to have a 
strain-free surface, is tilted to an angle of'" 70°. The diffraction pattern, which 
is formed on a transmission phosphor screen, consists of lines, and, as shown in 
Figure 5.23(b), is similar to a Kikuchi pattern such as is obtained in the 
transmission electron microscope (Chapter 3 and Figure 3.18). The pattern is 
recorded using a sensitive video camera which is focused on the other side of 
the phosphor screen, and sent to a framestore in a Pc. The raw pattern is noisy, 
has low contrast and is much more intense in the centre. Therefore before 
analysis, a background intensity is subtracted from the pattern and patterns 
from several video frames (typically 2-16) may be averaged to reduce the noise. 
The diffraction pattern is analysed in the PC, which is normally given informa­
tion on the crystal structure and microscope operating conditions. The analysis 
program measures the positions of the lines and the angle between them and 
eompares these to those predicted for the crystal structure. The erystallo­
graphic orientation of the sample is then calculate d and the pattern stored. 
The time for aequisition and analysis of a diffraetion pattern is ",,0·2s and the 
precision of angular measurement is typically 0,5_1,5°. The spatial resolution 
for diffraction from aluminium in a \V-filament SEM is ",60nm in the 
direction parallel to the specimen tilt axis, although it is significantly worse 
in the orthogonal direction because of the asymmetry of the interaction volume 
(see Figure 5.17). However, using a FEGSEM, the resolution is improved in 
the same sample to '" 15 nm. 
EBSD can therefore obtain diffraction data automatically and rapidly from 
very small volumes of material in bulk samples and can therefore perform some 
of the work which has traditionally been carried out by TEM. The orientations 
of a particular feature of the microstructure such as a recrystallized grain can 
be correlated with the microstructure, and by measuring the orientations of 
adjacent grains, grain boundary crystallography may be determined. Other 
applications include measurement of fracture plane, correlation of orientation 
and oxidation /corrosion behaviour and correlation of grain boundary crystal­
lography with electrical, chemical or mechanical behaviour. As the sharpness 
or quality of the diffraction patterns is sensitive to the perfection of the micro­
structure, EBSD may be used to determine strain variations in a microstructure 
and the technique has been used to investigate the strains adjacent to crack 
tips. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp'b) beam 
Specimen 
Data analysis 
and prcscntution 
I') Diffraction pattem 
phosphor screen 
CCD 
camera -
Index Background 1+1 Frame 
pattcm I+-L_o'o"obc"c"c'c'---, average 
Figure 5.23 (a) Schematic diagram ci the EBSD technique. The diffraaion pattern from a highly 
tilted sample is detected on a transmission phosphor screen and recorded with a 
sensitive CCD camera. The pattern may be averaged over several TV frames and 
a background subtraaion performed before the pattern is analysed by a PC. (b) 
An electron backscatter pattern from germanium. The pattern has a wider angular 
range (50°) than an SACP. and shows more detail. (D. J. Dingley) 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 15) 
Extensive data may be acquired by rastering the electron beam over the 
sample or alternatively moving the sample in a raster, whilst acquiring diffrac­
tion patterns. These data may be used to display 'maps' showing the orientation 
variation over a sample. These are analogous to the 'composition maps' which 
may be obtaincd using EDX or WDX (Chapter 6). Using beam scanning, up to 
20000 diffraction pattcrns, e.g. a grid of 200 x 100 points, may be collected in 
'"" I hr, or alternatively linear scans of the sample may be used. 
Such data contain a very large amount of detailed information about the 
sample and can be used to detcrmine grain and subgrain sizes and shapes, 
orientations and texture (Figure 5.24(d» and misorientations (Figure 
5.24(c», phase distributions, etc. It is likely that EBSD will soon become a 
routine research tool for quantitative mctallography. 
Although EBSD is mainly uscd to dctcrmine the orientations of crystals as 
described above, it can also be used to determine the crystal structure of 
regions down to a few nanometre s in diametcr, and as this is achicvcd on 
bulk samples, there are some potential advantages over the TEM methods 
discussed in Chapter 3. The method is similar to that described above except 
that the diffraction pattern is recorded more slowly and at higher resolution, 
and the pattern line spacings and symmetry are compared with an extensive 
crystal database. 
5.9 The use of other signals in the SEM 
5.9.1 The charge collection mode 
Every incident electron generates hundreds or even thousands of 'electron-hole 
pairs' when it knocks electrons from the outer shells of the atoms of the 
specimen, giving rise to a free electron and a 'hole' in the outer shell. 
Normally the vast majority of these pairs recombine within about 10-12 s -
in other words the electrons jump back into their places in the shells extremely 
quickly. However, if the specimen is a semiconductor, and a voltage is applied 
across it, then the electrons and holes will be dragged apart before they can 
recombine, and a current will flow between the electrodes (Figure 5.25). 
Alternatively , recombination of the carriers may be prevented by an internal 
field, such as that from a p-n junction. (It is this elTect which is used in the solid 
state backscattered electron detector discussed in section 5.2 and the X-ray 
detector discussed in Chapter 6.) We can, using suitable equipment, measure 
either the current generated in the specimen, in which case we obtain an ElllC 
(electron beam induced current) signal, or we can measure the voltage induced 
by the beam -EBIV (electron beam induccd voltage). 
Using either of these signals we can display an image which will represent the 
variation of the semiconductor properties across the specimen as shown in 
Figure 5.26. The current flowing from each point will depend on the conduc-
zzzPsgiolePfrp(.) (b) 
TD 
0° )0° 20° 50° 60° 
Misorientation 
(e) (d) 
Figure 5.24 Analysis of an EBSD raster of ISO by ISO poinLS with a step size of 60 nm on a 
fllle-grained aluminium sample showing the extensive information available from 
such a data set. (0) A 'pattern quality' map constructed from the individual 
diffraction patterns. The intensity of each pixel is determined by the contrast in 
the diffraction pattern, and as this is low at the grain boundaries the resulting map 
is equivalent to an image of the microstructure . (b) The distribution of grain 
boundaries in the sample in which high angle grain boundaries are shown as black 
and low angle grain boundaries as grey. (c) The distribution of grain boundary 
misorientation angles in the sample. (d) A III pole figure constructed from the 
data. RD 
zzzPsgiolePfrp(. ) • • • ~ Incidcn 
• 
• • · -. -t beam 
• -
(b) --------• 
• • • • • • • -• • • 
• 
A 
Figure 5.25 The 'charge collection' current mode of imaging in the SEM. (0) Electron hole pairs 
are generated within any specimen by the beam. (b) If a potential difference is 
applied across the specimen the electrons and holes can be separated before they 
recombine and a current will flow in the external circuit. This current is used as 
the signal for forming the image. 
Figure 5.26 Scanning electron micrograph of a silicon IMPATT microwave frequency power 
generating diode. This is a double exposure microgra ph in which secondary elec­
trons were used to show the surface of the chip and the gold wire bonded to the 
aluminium metallized surface. The EBIC signal was used to show the Schottky 
barrier under the PtSi contact as a grey stripe surrounded by the p-n junction of 
the guard ring which appears white. (D. B. Holt. Imperial College. London) 
zzzPsgiolePfrp156 Electron microscopy and analysis 
tivity of the specimen at that point, the lifetime of electrons and holes, and their 
mobility (the drift speed under unit potential gradient). 
These three parameters are of extreme importanee to the semiconduetor 
industry, and if their variation across a speeimen can be measured or made 
visible in the SEM, then faults such as impurities, poor contacts ete. within a 
single integrated circuit can be investigated without damaging it (Richards and 
Footner, 1992). It is even possible to study an integrated eircuit chip whilc it is 
bcing used, with eurrents flowing through its various components. 
5.9.2 Cathodoluminescence 
Many matcrials cmit light undcr electron bombardment , and if this is detectcd, 
wc can display an imagc in thc clIfliodo/lIIl1illeSCellT mode. We have already 
encountered this effect in the phosphor used on the viewing screens of the 
transmission electron microscope and CRT tube of the SEM, and in the 
scintillator electron detectors used in the SEM. Cathodoluminescence (CL) 
varies in colour and intensity as a function of the composition of many 
minerals, and in semiconductors such as gallium arsenide (GaAs). 
Consequcntly this mode of imaging is of particular importance in these fields 
of application. Cathodoluminesccnce is also observed in polymcrie or biologi­
cal material, and in thc latter materials, cathodoluminescent species may be 
used to 'label' the matcrial. 
Because cathodoluminescence may originate within most of the interaction 
volume of the sample, the spatial resolution is much worse than for electrons 
and is comparable with X-ray signals (Figure 5.6). Howcver, thc spatial reso­
lution may be much improved by the use of low aecelcrating voltages and field 
emission electron sources. 
As light detcetors are usually also sensitive to electrons, CL dctectors have to 
be designed to rcmove the electrons. Pcrhaps the simplest CL detection is 
achieved by removing the scintillating material from an electron detector so 
that the light is collected directly by the light guide. A specialized CL detector 
system is shown schematically in Figure 5.27. This employs a scmi-ellipsoidal 
mirror which collects the light from the specimen and focuses it into a light 
guide and out of the microscope for spectral analysis. 
CL appears as a band of wavelengths with a peak at a photon energy which 
is related to the energy gap between the filled valence band and empty con­
duction band of semicond ucting and insulating materials. Any alteration in the 
energy gap due to local changes of temperature, crystal structure or impurity 
level will lead to a change in emission. At temperatures at or ncar liquid helium 
temperature, the CL emission bands generally becomc more intense and much 
sharper, and the band may be resolved into a line spectrum. Analysis of such a 
spectrum enables very low levels of impurity « 0·01 ppm.) to be idcntified. 
Note that this is several orders of magnitude more sensitive than X-ray analysis 
(Chaptcr 6). 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 157 
Mirror 
Specimen 
Light Guide 
PM Spectrometer 
Figure 5.27 Schematic diagram of a cathodoluminescence detector which uses a semi-ellipsoidal 
mirror to collect the I ight and focus it into a light gu ide. 
CL is being increasingly used to study the nature and distribution of defects 
in electronic materials and is capable of providing detailed and important 
information about the electronic effects of these defects. Figure 5.28 shows a 
high-resolution plan vicw CL image of an InGaN single quantum well 
structure grown on sapphire. Analysis of the light spectra from different 
features of such an image reveals differences in the electronic structure of 
811. 4.00 tV 
wo-13mm Sig .. 1A-!>1MoCL 0 .. :18Iwgl99B 
PhQIoNo._~11 1.".:17:44 
Figure 5.28 High resolution panchromatic CL image of an InGaN single quantum well structure 
grown on sapphire recorded at 4keV and IOOpA current. (Courtesy of Oxford 
Instruments) 
zzzPsgiolePfrp158 Electron microscopy and analysis 
, 
"'/ , 
i'} ib} 
i<} 
Figure 5.29 Micrographs of a natural diamond. (0) Secondary electron micrograph. 
(b) Monochromatic CL micrograph with 516nm light. (c) Monochromatic CL 
micrograph with 444nm light. (J. B. Steyn. P. Giles and D. B. Holt. Imperial 
College. London) 
these regions. Interpretation of such CL data requires a good understanding of 
the solid-state physics of the material. 
Figure 5.29 shows CL micrographs of a natural diamond. The light emitted 
from the specimen has been passed through a spectrometer, and the different 
wavelength emissions from different areas of the specimen can dearly be 
seen. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 159 
5.9.3 Use of other signals and contrast modes 
Magnetic materials have their own contrast effects, because the magnetic field 
of a specimen will interact with the secondary and backscallered electrons. The 
SEM may therefore be used to determine the magnetic domain structure of the 
material. The specimen currellf, which is the current flowing to earth from the 
specimen, is sometimes used as a signal. As the specimen current is related to 
the number of electrons impinging on the specimen, less the number emilled as 
backscallered or secondary electrons, it gives a signal which is the inverse of 
the IOta I electron emission. However, the advent of more efficient electron 
detectors has meant that this signal is now no longer of great interest for 
imaging, although it is usually monitored, because it enables the beam 
current to be measured. 
The Tral/Smilled electron beam from a thin sample is, of course, the basis for 
transmission microscopy. Using a scintillator detector below the specimen in a 
SEM, or, alternatively, using a scanning system with a TEM, results in a 
scanning transmission electron microscope or STEAl. 
The resultant image from a STEM is similar 10 that from the same specimen 
in a TEM. The advantage of using STEM rather than TEM is that the image 
data arc produced in serial form, and may therefore be readily processed (see 
section 5.10). Although this has found some application with low contrast 
materials, and those which degrade rapidly under the electron beam, this 
technique, when used in conjunction with a standard TEM or SEM is not 
widely used. However, purpose built or dedicated scanning transmission micro­
scopes, with ultra high vacuum systems and field emission electron guns are 
powerful analytical instruments. and are discussed in Chapter 7. 
5.10 Image acquisition, processing and storage 
As mentioned earlier, many SEMs now usc digital rather than analogue control 
and there arc some major differences in the ways in which data arc processed 
and recorded. 
l'laving discussed, in the previous sections, how to set up the microscope , 
detector and specimen so as obtain the desired signal, we should pay some 
allention to how we will deal with the signal. One of the major differences 
between the TEM and the SEM is that in the laller we acquire the data 
gradually, pixel by pixel, and line by line, whereas in the former all the 
picture elements are built up together. Using computer terminology, we say 
that the SEM has serial data collection, and the TEM has parallel data 
collection. 
The imaging data for the SEM comes as a varying electrical signal from the 
detector, and it is therefore easy to modify this signal with an amplifier. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp160 Electron microscopy and analysis 
v.,----------, 
v 
-----.,,-/-----
x 
....... --_ ..... 
v.L-----oc=e e==cc-----­Scan dI5tm l~': 
(,) 
v.,--------
0 w • -0 > 
~ 
0 
~ -~ 
v, t---'" ~= ;:;:-----~ L..-- Scan distance v. 
-
(b) 
v.,--------
0 
~ • ~ 
0 > 
0 
0 w --00 
v.L-----e=~~~------ -" Scan distance 
Figure 5.30 The simplest type of signal processing. (0) The original signal from the detector. 
(b) Signal adjusted for optimum display on CRT by increasing the amplifier gain 
(contrast control) and subtracting a DC or black level component (brightness 
control). (c) Non-linear amplification (gamma control) may be used to emphasize 
features with weak contrast. (d) Signal dtfferentiation removes gradual background 
variations in the signa!. 
S.IO.I On-line processing 
The simplest on-line processing involves the adjustment of image brightness 
and contrast using a linear amplifier. Controls for this will be found on all 
microscopes . 
Consider the detector output voltage for a linesean which varies from V min to 
V max across a specimen, as shown in Figure 5.30(a), and note the voltages Vb 
and V", required to give black and white on the CRT. In order for us to 
produce an image on the CRT which has intensity levels running from black 
to white, we need to adjust Vmin until it equals Vb, and Vma_, until it equals Vw. 
This is achieved by altering V rna, (via the amplifier gain or contrast control) 
until Vmax -Vmin = V". -Vb and then subtracting a voltage Vmin (the bright­
ness control), until Vmin = Vb, as shown in Figure 5.30(b). 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 161 
In most circumstances this is all that is required to produce a good image, 
but some microscopes offer other signal processing options which may be of 
use in certain circumstances. 
For example, if we wanted to emphasize the dark features 'X' in the image, 
we could use non-linear amplification. Instead of the amplifier output being 
proportional to the input, as it would be in a linear amplifier, we might arrange 
for VOU1 to be proportional to the square root of Vin. This would then amplify 
the dark features more than the light ones, as shown in Figure 5.30(c). This is 
called gamma cOllfrol, after the term used to specify the grey level response of 
photographic film. Another type of processing sometimes used is signal differ­
elllillfioll, in which the output voltage of the amplifier is proportional to the 
slope of the voltage/time curve. This emphasizes regions where the signal 
changes rapidly, but fiallens the contrast from a gradually changing back­
ground, as shown in Figure 5.30(d), and an example is shown for the channel­
ling pallern in Figure 5.23(c). 
It is also sometimes useful to add signals from different detectors or subtract 
them from each other as we saw for the backseallered images in Figures 5.19 
and 5.21, and sometimes it may be beneficial to add or subtract two quite 
different signals. 
It is easy to manipulate the incoming signals in a variety of ways, and 10 
produce some very interesting results. However, the interpretation of the 
images may not be straightforward, and any but the simpler methods of 
signal processing should be used with caution. 
5.10.2 Data handling with analogue microscopes 
The microscope operator will need not only 10 view the scanned image so as to 
identify features of interest, focus and optimize the image, but also to obtain a 
permanent record of the chosen image. These two requirements often conflict. 
We saw in section 5.5, that in order to produce a good quality, noise-free 
image from a given specimen, a minimum beam current is required, and that 
this is inversely proportional to the time for a frame scan F. Figure 5.16 shows 
how the minimum usable probe size, which is approximately equivalent to the 
spatial resolution for secondary electrons, varies with specimen contrast and 
frame scan timc. 
The best quality images arc nceded for photographic recording, which is 
carried out with a camera focused on a high resolution CRT. The scan rate 
is slowed right down so that one frame takes typically 50-IOOs, while the 
camera shuller is open. 
If the scan is carried out at a rate of 50 frames per second then the display 
appears simply as a television image. This is very convenient if the operator 
wants to move the specimen, focus the image, or simply to sce what the 
specimen looks like. Also under these conditions, the microscope can be inter­
faced to a TV monitor or video recorder. However, as may be seen from Figure 
zzzPsgiolePfrp162 Electron microscopy and analysis 
5.16, the price that must be paid for such a fast scan rate is a dramatic loss of 
resolution. For example, considering a specimen with a contrast level of 50%, 
we see that although we might achieve a resolution of .....,5nm with a lOOs scan 
time recorded on photographic film, with a TV scan rate the resolution drops 
to ....., 100 nm. If we further assume that a TV system has a resolution of 
500 x 500 pixels, then, using the arguments of section 5.4.1, it can be seen 
that the maximum useful magnification in these circumstances will be x 3000. 
If it is necessary to work at higher magnifications, so as for example to focus 
an image for photographic recording, then the operator must compromise, and 
work with a slower scan rate, perhaps one or two frames per second. This 
problem is even more acute when a detector with a slow response time, such 
as a solid state backscallered detector is used. In this case, fast scan rates 
cannot be used at any magnification. 
5.10.3 Data handling with digital microscopes 
In a modern digital SEM the beam is allowed to dwell on each point on the 
speeimen (specimen pixel) for a pre-determined period and the image is built up 
by recording each pixel on an element of a /mmes/ore. The intensity of each 
pixel is typieally stored as a number between 0 and 255, and the size of the 
image is controlle d by the number of elements in the frameslore , which ean be 
varied, but is typically ....., 1200 x 1000. (In the discussions of section 5.5. this 
figure replaces the resolution of the CRT which was taken to be 1000 x 1000 
points.) The eon tents of the framestore are then displayed on a eomputer scrcen. 
One advantage of such a system is that the framestore image is persistent , 
unlike that of a CRT, and therefore the operator can view the image without 
using TV scan rates which, as diseussed above, give noisier images of lower 
resolution. With a framestore it is also possible 10 carry out/fame areraging, in 
which the data from suecessive scans are averaged for each pixel. This is 
essentially the same as using a longer time per sean, and we can therefore 
replace the frame time F in equation 5.20 by N x F, where N is the number 
of frames averaged. Figure 5.31 shows the effect of frame time on image 
quality. 
A permanent reeord of the image in a digital SEM is obtained by saving the 
eontents of the framestore to a computer as a bit-map image. 1·laving obtained 
a digital image, a large variety of options are available for obtaining further 
quantitative data. These include measurement of phase volume fractions and 
the sizes and shapes of particles, grains, holes etc. 
5.11 The preparation of specimens for examination in the SEM 
Because in most cases the SEM is used to study the surface morphology, bulk 
specimens are normally used and specimen preparation is far simpler than for 
transmission electron microscopy. Since there are no lenses below the specimen 
zzzPsgiolePfrp(. ) 
(b) 
«) 
Figure 5.31 The effea ciframe time on the quality of the secondary electron image ci a fracture 
surface. (0) TV rate (20 ms). (b) 500 ms. (e) 25 (XX) ms. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp164 Electron microscopy and analysis 
there is a great deal of space available to accommodate thc specimen and the 
various mechanical controls for manipulating it. This is particularly useful in 
the semiconductor industry, where it is necessary to inspect silicon wafers of 
diameter 200 mm or larger. 
For effective viewing of a specimen in the SEM it is usually necessary for the 
surface of the specimen to be electrically conducting. This necessity arises from 
the statistics of electron yield. When a specimen is bombarded with high energy 
electrons, for each electron impinging on the specimen there is a yield of 11 
backscattered electrons and 0 secondary electrons. Figure 5.8(b) shows the 
variation of the total electron yield (11 + 0) with the accelerating voltage of 
the microscope. The implication of this curve is that there arc only two 
operating voltages for the microscope where the yield is unity and hence 
electrons are leaving the surface at the same rate as they arc hitting it. For 
most materials these two crossover voltages (£1, and £2) are in the range 
1-5 keY, which is much lower than the normal operating voltage of the micro­
scope. Consequently, during normal operation there is a surplus of electrons 
building up on the specimen surface. If these arc not conducted away to earth, 
the specimen surface will become negatively charged until very soon the 
incoming primary electrons arc repelled and deviated from their normal 
path, and a distorted image will be formed. Such charging effects arc readily 
recognizable as seen in Figure 5.32(a). 
Clearly there is no difficulty in studying dean metal specimens, provided that 
they arc mounted so as to provide a conducting path to earth. However, non­
conductors such as eeramies, polymers and biological materials present a 
problem. In this case it is usual to coat the specimen with a thin (,.." 10nm) 
conducting layer of gold or carbon, and this is nowadays easily and rapidly 
done by splIller coating. If the microscope is operating at the highest resolution, 
then care must be taken to ensure that such a coating docs not mask fine 
surface detail. Also, coating may interfere with other signals or contrast 
modes, e.g. X-ray emission. 
The examination of non-conducting specimens, particularly polymers and 
biological materials in the SEM may present other problems, such as specimen 
degradation by beam heating, radiation damage, and specimen volatility in the 
high vacuum. For further details of these effects, and the steps which may be 
taken to overcome them, the reader is referred to a more specialized text (see 
bibliography). 
5.12 Low voltage microscopy 
An alternative approach to the problem of specimen charging is to operate the 
microscope at a voltage where, according to Figure 5.8(b), the electron yield is 
close to unity, so that no charging occurs. If the microscope is operated at a 
voltage between EI and E2 then the electron yield is greater than I and the 
sample charges positively. The potential between the filament and sample 
zzzPsgiolePfrp(oj 
(bJ 
Figure 5.32 Secondary electron micrographs of a nylon fabf"ic. (a) Uncoated specimen showing 
image degradation due to microdischarges. (b) A similar specimen after coating 
with IOnm of gold in a sputter unit. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp166 Electron microscopy and analysis 
thus increases and the beam energy moves towards £2. Thcre is therefore a self­
compensating effect which stabilizes the beam energy close to £2. Because the 
scattering coefficients are strong functions of the surface tilt, it may not be easy 
to eliminate charging from all regions of the sample simultaneously. 
The performance of conventional W-filament microscopes deteriorates 
markedly at low voltages, but modern FEG microscopes operate satisfactorily 
in the 1-5 keY range and may be used to examine uncoated ceramic and 
biological samples. 
5.13 Environmental scanning electron 
microscopy (ESEM) 
A normal SEM typically operates with a vacuum below 10-6 torr and samples 
associated with vapour or volatile components are unsuitabl e for examination 
without careful pre-treatment. Over the past few years, scanning electron micro­
scopes which operate at pressures in the region of 1-10 torr ha ve been developed 
to overcome these problems. 
Such instruments operate by maintaining a reasonably high vacuum in the 
microscope column and a higher pressure in the region of the specimen. This is 
achieved by separating these regions by small apertures, often corresponding to 
the electron beam apertures. with each region having its own pumping system. 
Typically the instrument has three such chambers -the gun, the column and 
the specimen chamber. 
Both secondary and back scattered electrons may be used in the ESEM. 
Large area scintillator detectors such as that shown in Figure 5.IO(a) may 
be used to detect the backscattered electrons. The Everhart-Thornley 
detector cannot be used for secondary electron detection as the high bias 
voltage would cause electrical breakdown at high pressures. However, 
gas-phase detectors whose operation is analagous to the detectors used for 
wavelength dispersive X-ray detection (section 6.2.2) have been developed 
for secondary electron detection. Figure 5.33 is an example of the imaging of 
a wet sample in an ESEM using such a gas-phase detector. 
There is generally some loss of resolution at high pressures due to clastic 
collisions between the electrons and the gas molecules. Nevertheless reason­
able operation can be maintained. As well as enabling imaging of wet 
samples and allowing in situ experiments involving gas or liquid phases, 
ESEM allows the imaging of uncoated non-conducting samples because 
any accumulate d electrical charges are dissipated by electron-molecule 
collisions. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpThe scanning electron microscope 167 
Figure 5.11 An algae mat in the fully wet condition imaged in an ESEM using agas-phase second­
ary electron detector (courtesy of Philips). 
5.14 Questions 
I Explain why reducing the prolx: size in the SEM results in a redllcLxi beam 
current. Could this Ix: countered by increasing the size of the objective 
aperture? 
2 It is required to examine a fractured component in the SEM at a magnifica­
tion of x 1000 and to achieve a depth of field of I mm. If the maximum 
working distanL"C that can Ix: uSLxi is SOmm, what is the maximum sized 
objective aperture that can Ix: USLxi? 
3 Explain why the electron probe size should be adjusted whenever thc 
magnification is altered. 
4 Calculate the natural contrast in a backsc.lttered image Ix:twccn phases of 
mean atomic nllmlx:rs 24 and 23. 
5 If the natural contrast in a samplc imaged using secondary electrons is 
O· I, what is the Ix:st obtainable spatial resolution in a W-filament 
microscope operating with the following parameters using a frame time of 
100s? 
zzzPsgiolePfrp168 Electron microscopy and analysis 
q (detcctor efficiency) = 0·2. 
i (current density at filament surface) = 4 A/em2• 
T (filament temperature) = 2800 K, 
C. (coefficient of spherical aberration) = 20 mm, 
E (accelerating voltage) = 20 keY. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChapter 6 
Chemical analysis in 
the electron microscope 
It has been stressed in Chapler 2 that whenever electrons with several kilo 
electron volts of energy strike 11 solid specimen, X-rays characteristic of the 
atoms present in the specimen arc produced. In discussing the formation of 
images in the TEM and SEM we have largely ignored these X-rays. However, 
to do so is to discard a great deal of information about the composition of the 
specimen. This was realized in the 1950s and since then increasing use has been 
made of alllypcs of electron microscopes for microanalysis. This term implies 
thaI an analysis can be performed on a very small amount of male rial, or, more 
usually, a very small part of a larger specimen. As conventional chemical or 
spectrographic methods of analysis cannot do this, microanalysis in the 
electron microscope has become an important tool for charactcrizing all 
types of solid material. 
In principlc we can determine two things from the X-ray spectrum emilled 
by any specimen. Measurement of the wavelength (or energy) of each 
characteristic X-ray that is emilled enables us to find out which elements are 
present in the specimen, i.e. to carry out a qllalilatire analysis. Measurement of 
how many X-rays of any type are emilled per second should also tell us how 
much of the element is present, i.e. enable a quantitatire allalysis to be carried 
oul. However, as this chapter will show, the instrumental and specimen 
requirements for quantitative analysis are such that the step from qualitative 
to quantitative analysis is not easily made. 
We should note there are three types of electron microscopes commonly used 
for microanalysis. These arc the SEM with X-ray detectors, the electron probe 
mieroanalyser, which is essentially a purpose-built analytical microscope of the 
SEM type, and transmission electron microscopes (TEM and STEM) filled 
with X-ray detectors. The role of these different instruments will be 
discussed later in this chapter. 
In a transmission electron microscope we can also obtain compositional 
information by measuring the energy loss of the transmilled electrons, and 
this technique will also be discussed. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp170 Electron microscopy and analysis 
6.1 The generation of X·rays within a specimen 
We have seen in section 2.8 that bombardment of a material with high energy 
electrons will result in the emission of 'characteristic' X-rays, whose wave­
lengths depend on the nature of the atoms in the specimen. together with 
white radiation (or Bremsstrahlung) of all wavelengths down to a minimum 
corresponding to the incident electron energy (Figure 2.8). (The reader to 
whom these concepts are unfamiliar might find it helpful to re-read section 
2.8 before continuing.) Before we can use the X-rays for analytical purposes we 
need to know which of the many characteristic X-ray lines for each element is 
the most intense; this enables us to choose the best line to use as an index of 
how much of each element is present in the sample. The situation at first 
appears to be very complex since. as Figure 6.1 shows. there is a large 
number of electron transitions possible in a large atom. each of which 
should lead to an X-ray of a unique wavelength. 
It transpires, fortunately for the microanalyst. that in the K series the lines 
K~ I and K,,2 (which may be so dose together that they cannot be distinguished) 
are seven to eight times more intense than K~I and Kj12 (another dose pair). 
Consequently the K 'doublet', as it is called, is most frequently used for 
analysis. However, it is not always possible to excite the K series of lines in 
an electron beam instrument since, as the atomic number of the emilling 
element increases, the energy required to knock out a K-shell electron also 
increases. For example, clements heavier than tin (2 = 50) need electrons of 
more than 25 keV to excite any K lines at all, and arc not efficient producers of 
L 
M Kiines 
u ",P,/ijl,/I, 
-~-, 
'r-M lines 
a,aJJ( 
'.---'. f-
Figure 6.1 Some of the more common transitions between the K, L, M and N shells ci an atom 
which lead to the X-ray lines indicated. The nomenclature is that of Figure 2.1. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 171 
K X-rays until the incident electron energy is about 75 keY. Since we would like 
to be able to analyse a specimen in an SEM, where electron energies of perhaps 
only 30keY arc available, we must look for other characteristic X-rays which 
arc more easily excited in order to detect heavy elements. Fortunately the L 
series of lines shown in Figure 6.1, or even the M series for very heavy 
elements, has very suitable properties. Again it turns out that of the vast 
number of possible lines, L~l and L~2 arc far stronger than the remainder, 
which can normally be ignored. A similar effect narrows the M series down 
to a few useful lines. Table 6.1 shows the energy and associated wavelength of 
the strongest K, Land M lines of the elements. The most efficient production 
of X-rays generally occurs when the bombarding electrons have about three 
times the X-ray energy. A study of Table 6.1 will show that all clements ha ve at 
least one strong X-ray line with energy less than IOkeY and therefore there 
should be no difficulty in analysing for all the elements, using a scanning 
electron microscope operating at 25-30 keY. 
In addition to direct excitation by electrons there is a further mechanism of 
X-ray production which must be considered in microanalysis. X-rays which arc 
passing through a specimen (perhaps having been generated previously by 
electron excitation) can themselves excite atoms which then emit characteristic 
X-rays of a slightly lower energy. Thus, for example, in a brass specimen the 
zinc K~ X-rays (energy S'64 keY) can excite extra copper K~ X-rays whose 
energy is less (S'05 keY, see Table 6.1). This effect is known as fluorescence. 
It is not a very efficient process, sinee only a few per cent of the higher energy 
rays will successfully excite the lower energy radiation. However, it may sig­
nificantly alter the relative amounts of characteristic radiation coming from 
alloys or compounds, particularly when clements with quite similar atomic 
numbers are present. In the example quoted we would expect that if the 
composition of the brass were 70% Cu/30% Zn we would find that rather 
more than the expected proportion of X-rays emitted were Cu K~ and rather 
fewer than expected were Zn K~, because of the fluorescence effect. We shall sec 
later that fluorescence is one of the effects which make aecurate quantitative 
analysis difficult. 
One of the key factors which determines the scale on which microanalysis 
can be carried out is the volume of the specimen which is penetrated by 
electrons (the interaction volume), and the volume of the specimen from 
which the detected X-rays originate (the sampling volume). As discussed in 
Chapter 5, and shown in Figure 5.6, because X-rays generated deep in the 
specimen can escape from the specimen and be detected, the sampling 
volume for X-rays is almost as large as the interaction volume. The interaction 
volume is smallest for low energy electrons and heavy elements, and it is 
difficult to make it much smaller than I ~lm x 111m x 111m without reducing 
the energy of the electron beam (Eo) so much that no useful X-rays arc emitted. 
As a consequence the smallest volume which it is practicable to analyse in a 
scanning microscope is '"" I (I1m)3. This sounds like a small volume but it 
zzzPsgiolePfrp172 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Table6.1 The energy and associated wavelength of the strongest K, Land M lines of the 
elements_ 
Atomic Relative K" L" M" 
Number Atomic 
Element Z Mass A, E (keV) I. (nm) E (keV) I. (nm) E (keV) A. (nm) 
(0) (b) (0) (b) (0) (b) 
Hydroge n 1 10 
Helium 2 40 
Lithium 3 6·' 0·05 
Beryllium 4 '0 0·1 I 11·40 
Boron 5 10·8 0·18 6·76 
Carbon 6 12·0 0·28 4·47 
Nitrogen 7 HO 0·39 3· 16 
Oxygen 8 16"0 0·52 2· 36 
Fluorine , 19·0 .... 1·83 
Neon 10 20·2 0·85 1"46 
Sodium " no 1·04 I· 19 
Magnesium 12 24_3 I·" 0·" 
Aluminium 13 27_0 1·49 0·83 
Silicon 14 28·1 I ·74 0·71 
Phosphorus 15 31·0 2·01 0·61 
Sulphur 16 32"1 2"31 0·54 
Chlorine 17 35-5 2"62 0·47 
Argon 18 39·9 2"96 0·42 
Potassium " 39·1 HI 0·37 
Calcium 20 401 3-69 0·34 0·34 3·63 
Scandium 21 45·0 4·09 0·30 0·39 3·1 3 
Titanium 22 47-9 4·51 0·27 0·45 H4 
Vanadium 23 50·9 4·95 0·25 0·51 2-42 
Chromium 24 52"0 5·41 0·23 0·57 2·16 
Manganese 25 54·9 5·90 0·21 0·64 1·94 
Iron 26 55"8 6·40 0·19 0·70 1·76 
Cobalt 27 58·9 6·93 0·18 0·77 1"60 
Nickel 28 58·7 7·48 0·17 0·85 1"46 
Copper 29 63-5 8·05 0·15 0·93 I ·33 
Zinc 30 65-4 8·64 0·14 1"0 I I ·23 
Gallium 31 69-7 '·25 0·13 I ·10 I ·13 
Germanium 32 72"6 '·88 0·12 I ·19 1·04 
Arsenic 33 74-9 0·54 0·12 I ·28 0·97 
Selenium 34 79·0 1·22 O· I I I ·38 0·90 
Bromine 35 79·9 1·92 0·10 148 084 
Krypton 36 al8 2"65 0·10 I ·59 0·78 
Rubidium 37 85-5 H9 0·09 1-69 0·73 
Strontium 3B 87"6 4-16 0·09 1-81 0·69 
Yttrium 39 88' 4·96 O·OS 1·92 064 
Zirconium 40 91-2 5-77 O·OS 204 0·61 
Niobium 41 92"9 6-61 0·07 2·17 0·57 
Molybdenum 42 95-9 7·48 0·07 2·29 054 
Technetium 43 98·0 8·36 0·07 2·42 0-51 
Ruthenium 44 101-1 9·28 0·06 2·55 0·48 
Rhodium 45 102"9 20·21 0·06 HO 046 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 173 
Table 6.1 (can tinued) 
Atomic Relative K~I L, , M" 
Number Atomic 
Element Z Mass A, E (keV) A (nm) E (keV) A(nm) E (keV) A (nm) 
(0) (b) (0) (b) (0) (b) 
Palladium 46 06·' 21"17 006 HO 044 
Silver 47 07"9 22·16 0·06 ,.,. 0·41 
Cadmium ... 12·4 23·17 0·05 3·13 0·39 
Indium " 14"8 24·21 0·05 3·29 0·38 
Tin 50 18·7 25·27 0·05 3·44 0·36 
Antimony 51 21 ·7 26·36 0·05 ].60 0·34 
Tellurium 52 27·6 27-47 0·04 3-77 0·33 
Iodine 53 26·9 28·61 0·04 3-94 0·31 
Xenon 54 31 ·3 29·77 0·04 4·1 I 0·30 
Caesium 55 32-9 30·97 0·04 4·29 0·29 
Barium 56 37·3 32·19 0·04 H. 0·28 
Lanthanum 57 38·9 33-44 0·04 4"65 0·27 0·83 1"49 
Hafnium 72 78·5 55-78 0·02 7·90 o • '·64 0·75 
Tantalum 73 81·0 57·52 0·02 8·14 o 5 1·71 0·73 
Tungsten 74 83-8 59-31 0·02 '·40 o 5 1·77 0·70 
Rhenium 75 86·' 61"13 0·02 8·65 o , ,.,,, 0·67 
Osmium 76 90·' 62-99 0·02 8·91 o , 1·91 0·65 
Iridium 77 92·2 64·88 0·02 9·17 o , 1·98 0·63 
Platinum 78 95·1 66·82 0·02 '·44 o 3 2"05 0·60 
Gold 79 97·0 68-79 0·02 9-71 o 3 2·12 0·58 
Mercury ., 200·6 70·81 0·02 ,.,. o 2 2·19 0·56 
Thallium 81 204·4 72-86 0·02 0·27 o 2 2·27 0·55 
Lead 82 207·2 74-96 0·02 0·55 o 2 2-34 0·53 
Bismuth B3 209·0 77-10 0·02 0·114 o , 2-42 0·51 
Polonium 114 210·0 79·28 0·02 1"13 o , , , 
Astatine 85 210·0 81·50 0·02 1"43 o I 
Radon 86 222·0 83-77 0·01 1·73 o I 
Francium 87 223·0 86·09 0·01 2·03 o 0 
Radium 88 226·0 88·45 0·01 2-34 o 0 
Actinium " 227·0 91}87 0·01 2"65 o 0 
Thorium 90 232·0 93-33 0·01 2"97 o 0 3·00 0·41 
Proactinium 91 231·0 95·85 0·01 3·29 009 3·08 0·40 
Uranium 92 238·0 98·42 0·01 HI 009 3·17 0·30 
contains about 10" atoms! The sampling volume will also depend on the 
energy of the X-ray being emitted, because an X-ray of energy E, will only 
be emilled if the electron energy E is greater than 1:.".:. Thus, the maximum 
depth from which X-rays originate is effectively the depth at which the electron 
energy falls below E,. Several attempts have been made to calculate the depth 
of X-ray production (R), and one commonly used approximation is that R is 
given (in micrometres, when Eo and E, are in keY) by 
R = P(E~68 _ E~·6S) (6.1) 
zzzPsgiolePfrp174 Electron microscop y and analysis 
/ • , 
Al Ko, 
Cu K" 
A I un> i "i un> ",~ui x 
Al K~ 
:...c, K" , 
~ opJl'" matrix 
o < ,. 
Ao~le .. tingvoh~ge (kY) 
Figure 6.2 The depth from which X-rays are produced in a specimen as a function of the elec­
tron energy, the nature of the X-rays being detected . and the composition of the 
matrix. 
where P is about 10-2 for materials with medium average atomic mass. To 
illustrate this point. Figure 6.2 shows the depth from which Cu K~ and Al K" 
X-rays may be produced by electrons in an AI-Cu alloy in which the major 
element is either aluminium or copper. 
If X-ray fluorescence occurs, then the sampling volume may actually be 
larger than the interaction volume. 
The fraction of the generated X-rays which reach the specimen surface and 
arc emilled will depend both on the energy of the X-rays and the average 
atomic weight of the specimen. For example, soft (low energy, long wave­
length) X-rays such as carbon K" arc readily absorbed by solids and 
therefore relatively few escape from thc surface. On the othcr hand, hard 
(high energy, short wavelength) X-rays such as molybdcnum K" can 
penetrate many micrometres of most solids, and are depleted only a lillie by 
absorption in the specimen. Clearly therefore both the volume which is being 
analysed, and the fraction of the X-rays which arc emilled from the specimen 
depend very critically on (a) the energy of the electron beam, (b) the energy 
(wavelength) of the X-ray being studied and (c) the local atomic weight of the 
specimen. 
As was stressed earlier, this complexity makes accurate analysis extremely 
difficult. 
6.2 Detection and counting of X-rays 
Ideally a system which is to be used for the analysis of a specimen in a scanning 
or transmission electron microscope should be able to reproduce for us the 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 175 
entire spectrum of X-rays emilled from the surface. However, as we have by 
now learnt to expect, the ·ideal' is rarely allainable in practice. In the present 
case we generally have to choose between two very different methods of 
obtaining the data. Parts of the spectra obtained using these techniques, 
from the silver solder joint whose microstructure is shown in Figure 5.21, 
are shown in Figure 6.J. Thc ware/engtll dispersire spectrometer or WDS is 
the basis of the purpose-built electron probe microanalyser. The spectrum 
obtained with a wavelength dispersive spectrometer is shown in Figure 
6.J(a). These devices can detcrmine extremely accurately the position of a 
single X-ray linc (i.e. its wavelcngth or energy), can resolve closely spaced 
lines and are particularly suitcd to measuring thc height (intcnsity) of a peak 
above the background level. Alternatively, many SEMs and TEMs are 
equipped with an energy dispersire spectrometer or EDS dctection system 
which is able to detect and display most of the X-ray spectrum, but with 
some loss of precision and resolution as indicated in Figurc 6.J(b). 
Nowadays, the distinction between analytical scanning microscopes and 
electron probe microanalysers is not elear. as some SEMs are filled with 
WDS systems and some microanalysers use EDS as well as WDS. We shall 
now consider the two types of analysis system in more detail, to see why there is 
still a need for both. 
6.2. I Energy-dispersive analysis 
We shall deal with the energy-dispersive detection system first, since, although 
it is historically the more recent, it is now the more generally applicable and 
certainly the more versatile system. The development of EDS analysis has bcen 
responsible for a major revolution over the past twenty five years in the use of 
electron beam instruments for the microcharacterization of materials. 
In outline, the detector normally consists of a small piece of semiconducting 
silicon or germanium which is held in such a position that as many as possible 
of the X-rays emilled from the specimen fall upon it. Since X-rays cannot be 
deflected, the detector must be in the line of sight of the specimen. This means 
that in a scanning electron microscope it normally occupies a similar position 
to the secondary electron detector (see Figure 5.9). In order to collect as many 
X-rays as possible the silicon should be as near to the specimen as is practic­
able. In a SEM it may be possible to place the detector 20 mm or less from the 
specimen, but the problems are greater with a TEM because the specimen is 
within the objective lens. 
The detector works in the following way. Each incoming X-ray excites a 
number of electrons into the conduction band of the silicon leaving an identical 
number of positively charged holes in the outer electron shells. The energy 
required for each of these excitations is only J·SeY; consequently the 
number of electron-hole pairs generated is proportional to the energy of the 
X-ray photon being detected. For example, an Al K~ X-ray, with an energy of 
zzzPsgiolePfrp176 Electron microscopy and analysis 
AgL" 
Cd L o 
(. ) 
X-ray merg)' 
(b) 
Figure 6.3 Part of the spettra obtained from a specimen of silver solder. a copper-silver--cad­
mium alloy. (0) Spettrum obtained using wavelength dispersive analysis. (b) The 
same region of the spearum. obtained using energy dispersive X-ray analysis. 
Using this technique . the Ag L~ and Cd L, peaks are not resolved and the Ag L, and 
Cd L~ are barely resolvable. 
1·49 keY, will give rise to approximately 390 electron-hole pairs. If a voltage is 
applied across the semiconductor a current will flow as each X-ray is absorbed 
in the detector and the magnitude of the current will be exactly proportional to 
the energy of the X-ray. In practice, if pure silicon is used the current generated 
is minute compared with the current which flows normally when a voltage is 
applied; in other words the resistivity is too low. This is overcome by three 
stratagems which combine to make the final detector seem rather more com­
plicated than it really is. Figure 6.4 shows the result, and contains the features 
which are common to virtually all energy-dispersive detectors. 
The resistivity of the silicon is increased by (a) making the whole detector a 
semiconductor p-i-n junction which is reverse biased, (b) doping the silicon 
with a small concentration of lithium, and (c) cooling the whole detector to 
liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K). The current which normally passes bet wccn 
the gold electrodes is now very small indeed until an X-ray enters the detector, 
then the resultant current can be amplified and measured fairly easily. The 
zzzPsgiolePfrpwindow Chemical analysis in the electron microscope 177 
--3mm • • 
, 
row 
mm 
Figure 6.4 A silicon energy-dispersive X-ray detector. The beryllium window and gold contact 
layers are grossly exaggerated in thickness: typical thicknesses would be 7--8flm for 
the Be. and 10-20nm for the Au. 
detector shown schematically in Figure 6.4 consists of a Si(Li) semiconductor 
junction in which the i region occupies most of the 3 mm thickness. Thin layers 
of gold arc necessary on both surfaces of the detector so that the bias potential 
can be applied. The film of gold on the outer faee of the detector must be as 
thin as possible so that very fcw X-rays arc absorbed in it; a layer only 20 nm 
thick provides adequate conductivity. Thc gold-coated outer surface is usually 
further protccted by a thin window of beryllium or a polymer. This window is 
necessary to prevent contaminants from the specimen chamber of the micro­
scope from condensing on thc vcry cold surfacc of thc dctector and forming a 
furthcr barricr to the entry of X-rays. Unfortunately the window itself, despite 
being made of beryllium (Z = 4) or carbon (Z = 6) and only being a few 
micrometres thick, absorbs a significant proportion of the low energy X-rays 
falling on the detector and therefore makes light clements particularly difficult 
to detec!. It is impracticable to detect X-rays of energy less than I ke V with this 
type of detector, and this therefore eliminates all elements lighter than sodium. 
Windowless detectors, or detectors with ultra-thin windows of formvar or 
some other polymer film arc now available, and these extend the analytical 
range down to boron. However, such detectors need to be used in microscopes 
which have extremely good vacuum systems, and need very careful protection 
from accidental air leaks such as those that oecur during specimen changes. 
The current which flows between the electrodes when an X-ray enters the 
detector lasts for an extremely short time (less than IllS) and is normally 
referred to as a pulse. Each pulse is amplified and then passed to a computer 
acting as a multichannel analyser (MCA), which decides which of perhaps 1000 
channels, each representing a different X-ray energy, the pulse should be regis­
tered in. The MCA thus effectively collects a histogram of the energies of all the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp178 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Amplil1cr N,m .. ,) 
" counts 
Figure 6.5 A simplified energy-di spersive analysis system. Pulses from the deteaor are ampli­
fied and then stored in the appropriate channel ci multi-channel analyser. In reality. 
the MCA would contain perhaps 1000 channels instead of the 24 shown here. 
X-rays arriving at the deteetor, as indicated in Figure 6.5. This histogram is 
then displayed on a screen, and usually appears as a smooth curve such as is 
shown in Figure 6.3(b). 
The solid state detector is very efficient, and almost 100% of the X-rays 
entering the detector crystal will produce a pulse. However, the pulse process­
ing time, during which an X-ray photon is detected and the resulting pulse 
amplified and sorted by the MeA, is short but finite, and this process must be 
completed before the next pulse can be dealt with. The pulse pile-up rejection 
circuit manages this operation, which is a very critical aspect of the EDS 
system. Pulse processing speed limits the rate at which X-rays can be 
counted, and at the time of writing this is typically about ten thousand 
counts per second (cps). If the count rate is less than a few thousand cps, 
then most of the incoming pulses are processed, but as the count rate rises, 
an increasing fraction of the pulses are rejected. The total time elapsed during 
an analysis consists of the time for which the detector was counting (lirc tiIllC), 
plus the time for which the detector was ignoring incoming X-rays (dmd tilllc). 
In determining the X-ray count rate from a specimen, it is therefore the number 
of counts collected for a given li)'c lilllC, not clapsed lilllC, which is required. 
Fortunately, modern EDS systems will record both times, and this should 
cause the analyst no problems. 
The high efficiency of the EDS detector, coupled with the relatively large 
collection angle (typically greater than 0·5 steradians in an SEM) means that 
data may be collected rapidly at quite low beam currents. From a typical 
sample, a reasonable spectrum can usually be obtained within a minute or two. 
The EDS system is controlled by a computer which also stores the energies 
of the X-rays from all the elements; consequently it is a simple mailer for the 
computer to identify the element giving rise to a line in the spectrum, or 
alternatively to indicate on the screen the positions on the spectrum at which 
lines for any chosen element would appear. Thus qualitative analysis is 
extremely rapid with such a system. Figure 6.6 shows typical spectra 
zzzPsgiolePfrp(,) 
o 
(b) 
o 
Figure 6.6 EDS spectra obtained from a particle of impure MgO on a carbon support film. 
The vertical line in the centre of the spectrum is the computer cursor from which 
the operator can read off the energy of any channel of the spectrum. (0) Spearum 
from a standard detector with a beryllium window. (b) Spectrum obtained in 3005 
using an ultra-thin window. light element detector. (c) as (b) but with a 50s count 
time. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp180 Electron microscopy and analysis 
obtained from impure MgO particles on a carbon substrate. The microscope 
was equipped with a normal Be window detector as well as a thin-window 
detector for light element analysis, and the difference in performance of the 
detectors at the light clement end of the spectrum can be clearly seen. 
From the foregoing description it would seem that the EDS is an ideal 
system for presenting all the available X-ray data from a specimen in a con­
venient form from which both qualitative and quantitative analyses could be 
deduced. However there are some serious limitations to be considered. 
First as discussed above, detection of elements lighter than sodium is imposs­
ible with a standard detector. 
Secondly, in order to both preserve the detector crystal and to reduce noise 
in the system, the detector must be kept at 77 K at all times, which is clearly an 
experimental difficulty. 
Thirdly, the energy resolution of the detector is poor; in other words, each 
X-ray line is not detected as a sharp line, but, as seen in Figure 6.6, as a broad 
peak, typically lOO-lOOeV wide. Not only does this make it impossible to 
resolve closely spaced lincs, as may be seen by comparing thc Agl and Cdl 
lines in Figurcs 6.3(0) and 6.3(h), but, as any X-ray line now occupies several 
channels of the MeA, the peak height is reduced. This factor, togcthcr with the 
relatively largc amount of elcctronic noise in the system results in rather low 
peak to background ratios compared to WDS. As we shall see latcr, a low peak 
to background ratio will affect not only the limit of detectability of the 
analyscr, but also its use for quantitative analysis. 
A further problem with an energy dispersive system is that undcr certain 
circumstances spurious peaks in the spectrum may bc produced. The most 
important of these effects arc thc .HIIIl peak and the silicon escape peak. As 
discussed above, the energy of an X-ray photon entering the detector is deter­
mined from the number of electron-hole pairs created. I f two identical photons 
enter the detector simultaneously, then twice as many hole pairs are created, 
the detector system will interpret this as being due to a single photon of twice 
the energy, and this pulse will be sorted accordingly to produce a sum peak at 
an energy of twice that of the X-rays being detected. The escape peak is due to 
an X-ray entering the detector and ionizing a silicon atom in the detector 
crystal by knocking out a K-shell electron. The original X-ray photon loses 
1·74keV in energy (i.e. the energy of SiK~ X-rays), and unless the resulting 
SiK~ X-ray photon is absorbed by the detector, thus releasing its energy to the 
detector, then a peak 1·74 keV below the main peak is produced. 
Both escape peaks and sum peaks are only significant under conditions 
where there is a very strong main peak and a high count rate. As they occur 
in predictable positions in the spectrum, they are easily recognized by an 
experienced microscopist, and by the computer. 
1·laving painted such a gloomy picture of the energy-dispersive analysis 
system we should emphasize the advantages. With an energy-dispersive 
system we can place a detector very dose to the specimen in a TEM or SEM 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 181 
and therefore collect the X-rays very efficiently, and as X-rays of all energies 
are collected at the same time we can acquire a complete spectrum, and 
therefore a qualitative analysis, in a few minutes. 
6.2.2 Wavelength-dispersive analysis 
The three areas in which the EDS system performs badly -light element 
detection, peak separation, and peak to background ratio -are the strong 
points of the other major X-ray detection system for electron microscopes, 
the wavelength-dispersive spectrometer (WDS). 
The principle of the WDS is that the X-radiation coming from the specimen 
is filtered so that only X-rays of a chosen wavelength (usually the characteristic 
wavelength of the element of interest) are allowed to fall on a detector. The 
'filtering' is achieved by a crystal spectrometer which employs diffraction to 
separate the X-rays according to their wavelength. A common arrangement for 
the spectrometer is illustrated in Figure 6.7. The X-rays leaving the specimen at 
a certain angle, the take-off angle (q,), arc allowed to fall onto a crystal of lattice 
spacing (I. If the angle between the incident X-rays and the crystal lattice planes 
is 0, then the only X-rays which will be diffracted by the crystal and thus reach 
the detector will be those obeying Bragg's Law (section 3.1). The wavelength of 
the transmitted X-rays is therefore given by 
_2.d"',,,; "-,,0 A=-
" ( 6.2) 
If the spectrometer is to be used to detect. say Fe K~ , then the characteristic 
wavelength (0'19 nm from Table 6.1) is substituted into equation 6.2, and the 
appropriate value of 0 can be calculated for the particular crystal in use. If the 
spectrometer is set to this angle then only the Fe K~ characteristic X-rays will 
reach the detector and be counted. The detector no longer has to discriminate 
betwecn X-rays of different encrgies -it is sufficicnt for it to count thc X-ray 
photons arriving. A much simpler dctector than is found for EDS is used. This 
is the gas proportional counter, in which much faster count rates can be 
tolerated. One of the disadvantages is that because the X-rays must be reason­
ably well collimated before reaching the crystal, two sets of slits (SI and S2) are 
generally used. In order that as many as possible of the X-rays leaving the 
crystal arrive at the detector the geometry of the spectrometer is chosen so that, 
as shown in Figure 6.7, all possible X-ray paths are focused onto the detector. 
In order to achieve this focusing effect the specimen, crystal and detector 
must all lie on a circle of radius R known as the Rowland circle and shown 
dotted in Figure 6.7. Also the crystal must be curved -in the lohan type of 
spectrometer shown in the figure it is bent to a radius 2R. These requirements 
place several restrictions on the analysis system: the spectrometer is necessarily 
quite large; its mechanism is complicated, since it has to be able to alter 0 while 
kceping both the crystal and the detector on the Rowland circle; precision 
zzzPsgiolePfrp182 Electron microscopy and analysis 
, R 
....... Rowland circle , ------Electroll 
b". 
X-rays 
s,~// s \ ,," \ ~ ......... 
~\ ...... ; ------
Specimen , , 
, , 
Detector L-,' , 
S, .... , 
I ' 
, , , , , , , , 
Figure 6.7 A crystal X-ray spettrometer. X-rays emitted from the specimen are collimated by 
two slits $1 and $1. diffratted by the curved crystal. and then focused on to the detec­
tor. For the maximum efficiency the specimen. crystal and detettor must all lie on 
the Rowland circle of radius R. 
engineering is required, since, in order to discriminate between very close lines, 
the angle 0 must be set to an accuracy of beller than one minute of arc; finally 
the position of the specimen is absolutely critical, since ifitlies off the Rowland 
circle by as lillIe as a few micrometres the number of X-rays reaching the 
spectrometer will be severely reduced. These restrictions make the design of 
a crystal spectrometer difficult and expensive. The mechanics of a crystal spec­
trometer allow the angle 0 to be altered only over a limited range, and therefore 
to cover the whole X-ray spectrum a range of crystals, normally four, with 
different lallice spacings, are required. Although some spectrometers are 
designed to hold only one crystal, requiring the instrument to be equipped 
with four spectrometers, many spectrometers now have two or four crystals 
which may be interchanged automatically. 
Because of the design of a crystal spectrometer, the geometric efficiency is 
low, and a solid collection angle of 0·01 steradians is typical. The detector 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 183 
efficiency is also quite low, typically less than 30%, because of losses both in 
the diffracting crystal and at the counter. Despite the difficulty and expense of a 
crystal spectrometcr, it remains an essential tool for analysis in the electron 
microscope because of four major advantages: 
(0) The resolving power of a crystal spectrometer is excellent. As may be 
seen in Figure 6.3(0), the lines are sharp and there is rarely a problem of 
adjacent lines overlapping. 
(b) The peak-to-background ratio of each line is much higher (often by a 
factor of ten) than can be achieved with a solid detector. 
(c) Since the X-ray detector normally used in a crystal spectrometer is 
capable of counting at very high rates (perhaps 50 000 cps) it may be 
possible to collect data from a single element in a very short counting 
time. 
(d) One of the main reasons for using a crystal spectrometer is its ability to 
detect X-rays from light clements. With suitable crystals of large lallicc 
spacing it is possible to detect and count X-rays as soft as boron Ket or 
even beryllium Ket. 
Although, as mentioned above, a windowless EDS detector can be used 
down to the limit of boron, the greater sensitivity and beller resolving power 
of the erystal spectrometer give this technique a distinct advantage at the 
present time. 
On the other hand, the disadvantages of an X-ray spectrometer make its use 
very time-consuming and hence restrict its major applications to the things it 
docs well -detection of low concentrations, detection of light clements, and 
quantitative measurement of peak heights. There are some obvious dis­
advantages in using a crystal spectrometer for qualitative analysis. These 
arc that as only one wavelength of X-ray is detected at any time, a scan of 
all the required wavelengths can take a considerable time. Also, since the 
spectrometer employs diffraction there will be not one angle of the crystal 
(0) at which a certain line is detected but several, one corresponding to each 
value of II in equation 6.1. Thus there may be as many as seven or eight 
orders of reflectioll detectable from a major X-ray line and therefore the 
spectrum eontains far more lines than that collected by the energy-dispersive 
detector. 
In summary, the two main X-ray detection and measurement systems, EDS 
and WDS, each have their strong points. The EDS is elearly beller suited to 
rapid qualitative analysis, while the WDS may give more aecurate quantitative 
results. As we shall sec in the next section, both have wide application in 
electron microscopy. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp184 Electron microscopy and analysis 
6.3 X-ray analysis of bulk specimens 
6.3. I Instrumentation 
The earliest electron probe mieroanalysers pre-dated the SEM and were simply 
instruments which generated a beam of electrons, directed it at a specimen and 
used one or more erystal spectrometers to analyse the X-radiation emilled. 
This represented a great advance in analytical technique, since the electron 
beam could be directed at a relatively small area of a solid specimen and an 
analysis obtained without destroying the specimen. The region of the specimen 
to be analysed was selected using a light microscope, and the accuracy with 
which the beam could be positioned was rather limited. It was soon realized 
that by scanning the electron beam and installing an electron detector, an 
imaging system could be incorporated. Since the size of the sampling volume 
discussed in section 5.1 implies that no useful analysis can be made of a region 
smaller than I ~tm x I ~tm x 111m there seemed to be no point in making the 
electron beam smaller than this. Indeed, as the low geometric efficiency of a 
crystal spectrometer means that a probe current of the order of I ~tA is 
required, the arguments of section 5.5, and equation 5.13, show that a probe 
of diameter'"" 111m is needed to obtain this level of beam current. 
However, electron probe mieroanalysers have progressed considerably, and 
an example is shown in Figure 6.8. A typical instrument is equipped with four 
computer controlled crystal spectrometers, containing a range of crystals such 
that the whole spectrum can be covered. An EDS system for preliminary 
qualitative analysis is filled. Secondary and backseallered imaging can be 
carried out, and the spatial resolution in secondary electron mode is beller 
than IOnm. A fixed focus light microscope is retained, not only for examina­
tion of the specimen, but more importantly for ensuring that the specimen 
height may be adjusted until it is on the Rowland circle. In the design of 
such an instrument , particular allention is paid to the electron gun which 
must be capable of providing the large beam currents necessary coupled with 
the extreme stability which is required if an analysis is to be carried out over a 
period of several hours. 
As well as automation of the spectrometers, the specimen stage will be 
motorized and be capable of computer control. Thus, areas of interest may 
be selected by the operator, and the instrument may then be left to carry out 
the analysis, perhaps running for several hours under automation. Such an 
instrument is ideally suited to an environment where accurate quantitative 
analysis is required from a large number of specimens on a routine basis. 
An alternative approach is to mount an energy dispersive detector on to an 
existing scanning microscope. This is ideal for qualitative analysis, and the 
majority of scanning electron microscopes arc now equipped with an EDS 
system, an example being seen in Figure 5.3. For reasons which are 
discussed in section 6.5, this may not be an ideal combination for the 
purposes of quantitative analysis; nevertheless, some scanning microscopes 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 185 
Figure 6.8 An elettron probe microonalyser. (JEOL Ltd.) 
are capable of quantitative analysis, and some may also be filled with crystal 
spectrometers. For a laboratory which does not have the requirement for a 
dedicated electron probe microanalyser, a good analytical SEM provides an 
acceptable and cheaper alternative. 
6.3.2 The presentation of analytical information 
For all the instruments discussed in this section, which are based on a scanning 
electron beam, there are various ways in which qualitative analytical informa­
tion obtained from a suitable (ideally, flat) specimen can be presented , and the 
method selected will depend upon which of three types of information is 
required. This will be either (a) an analysis of a selected region of chemically 
homogeneous composition such as a phase, (b) an overall analysis of the whole 
or pari of a sample, or (c) an analysis to determine the variation of composition 
within a region of the sample. 
The first type of analysis is usually accomplished simply by a ·spot analysis', 
in which the electron beam is stopped and positioned earefully on the point to 
be analysed, which has been selected on the SEM screen while the image was 
still being displayed. The X-ray data, either a single peak or series of peaks 
being detected by a crystal spectrometer, or the whole spectrum being accu­
mulated by an EDS system, can be collected for as long as is necessary and the 
composition at the selected point (or more correctly in the sampling volume of 
zzzPsgiolePfrp186 Electron microscopy and analysis 
about I ~lm3) can be determined. As an alternative, instead of using a station­
ary beam, we might, while analysing, scan a small raster on the specimen, 
making sure that the raster was contained within a chemically homogeneous 
regiOn. 
The second type of analysis entails obtaining data from a larger area of the 
specimen, the actual area being, of course, dependent on the scale of 
the chemical heterogeneity in the specimen. For an EDS system this only 
requires scanning the beam over a suitable area which might be 
IOO~lm x I(){)~lm, as the X-rays are detected. The analysis is then an average 
of the area of the image on the screen. However, for a WDS system this is not 
possible, because, as may be seen from Figure 6.7, only one point P (strictly, 
one line) of the specimen lies on the Rowland circle. Therefore as the beam 
scans a raster, X-rays from regions other than those within a few micrometres 
of P will not be focused on the detector, will not be collected effectively, and a 
misleading result may be obtained. If an analysis of an area greater than about 
5 ~Im x 5 ~lm is required by WDS, then this must be done by scanning the 
specimen and not the beam. 
In order to examine the variation of chemical composition within a sample, 
many analyses must be carried out over the area of interest. There are three 
approaches to this problem; the simplest. and probably the best, is to use 
back scattered electron compositional imaging (section 5.7) to identify regions 
of chemical homogeneity, and then to carry out spot analyses of these areas. 
An alternative is to select the X-ray signal from an element of interest, and to 
display its intensity as the beam (or for a WDS system, the specimen) is 
scanned. For a crystal spectrometer, this simply requires the use of a 
ralemeter which will measure the instantaneous count rate, rather than the 
total number of counts from the selected peak. For an EDS system, it is 
necessary to make the ratemeter sensitive only to the counts going to a 
sclected number of channels. If the X-ray count rate measured by the 
ratemeter is used to deflect a spot on the display screen then a trace of 
composition versus distance as illustrated in Figure 6.9 can be obtained. 
Notice that although for case of recognition the 'line' of the analysis is 
shown superimposed on a micrograph of the specimen, these were taken separ­
ately. First an electron image of the specimen was recorded, then the spot was 
scanned along the chosen line and recorded on the same photographic 
exposure. Then the spot was scanned very slowly, taking IOO-500s, while the 
trace shown in Figure 6.9 was displayed and photographed. 
As can be seen from the example illustrated, this technique makes it quite 
simple to find the regions where there is a significant change in the concentra­
tion of an element. An accurate analysis is difficult, as the electron beam spends 
only a short time on each spot, and the counting statistics are poor. 
Another way of displaying information about the distribution of a single 
element is by what is often termed X-ray mapping. Using this technique, the X­
ray counter is uscd in a similar way to any of the other detectors in the SEM to 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 187 
Figure 6.9 The variation of copper concentration across a section of an aluminium-copper alloy. 
The trace in the lower part of the figure is the copper count rate (i.e. the output of 
the rate meter) as the electron beam was scanned along the line indicated in the 
micrograph. 
form an image. This is essentially an extension of the linescan method discussed 
above, to two-dimensional scanning. In its simplest form, the display is made 
bright every time an X-ray photon is counted. The image then consists of 
bright dots. the dot density being a qualitative measure of the concentration 
of the clement of interest. As may be seen in Figure 6.10, the quality of such dot 
maps is not very good, primarily because the counting statistics are very poor 
even for exposures of more than 1000 s. 
A great improvement is obtained by using digital X-ray mapping to obtain 
this type of information. The concept of digital scanning electron microscopy 
zzzPsgiolePfrp{b} 
{<} 
Figure 6./0 X-ray 'dot' distribution maps from the aluminium-copper alloy of Figure 6.9. 
(0) Secondary electron image. (b) Copper K~ map. (el Aluminium K~ map. 
Despite the obvious presence of fine details within the copper-rich phase, the dot 
maps do not show it because of poor spatial resolution and poor counting statistics. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 189 
was introduced in section 5.10. In this method the beam is controlled by 
computer to move to a grid of points on the specimen, which is the digital 
equivalent of a raster. The beam remains at each of these points for a pre-set 
time, while an analysis is carried oul. The data are stored in the computer 
memory and may be displayed on a grey level or colour scale. Each analysis 
point then becomes a pixel in the displayed image. One of the advantages of 
this method is that, with an EDS system, data from several clements may be 
collected at the same time by directing the counts from specified channels of the 
spectrum into different computer stores. An electron image may be acquired at 
the same time. l'laving acquired a digital X-ray map, the data may be subse­
quently manipulated as discussed in section 5.10. An example of digital X-ray 
mapping , in which X-rays from four elements were acquired simultaneously is 
shown in Figure 6.11. Using the same control technology, digitallinescans may 
also be obtained. 
In obtaining an X-ray map from a solid specimen, it must be borne in mind 
that the spatial resolution is limited to around I ~lm, and there is no point in 
working at high magnifications. For example, the X-ray maps of Figure 6.11 
were obtained at a screen magnification of 200 (on a 10cm x 10cm screen) 
using a digital scan of 128 x 128 points which took 60 minutes. Each specimen 
pixel is thus approximately 4 11m x 4 ~lm, which is larger than the sampling 
volume, which it needs to be in order 10 avoid blurring of the image by 
overlap of data from adjaeent pixels (see section 5.4). 
Even so, the quality of an X-ray map does not compare with that of an 
electron image, and the reason for this, as we have mentioned before, lies in the 
poor counting statistics for X-rays as compared with electrons. This may 
elearly be seen if we analyse Figure 6.11. The total X-ray count rate was 
approximately 2000 cps and the beam current 10-9 A. The strongest peak 
was CoK ~, for which 10 channels were eounted. This amounts to around 
15% of the counts for the whole spectrum. The count rate for Co K~ was 
therefore approximately 250 cps. The 16384 pixels were seanned in a time of 
60 minutes, and therefore each pixel represents an analysis time of 0·2 s. 
Therefore the average number of Co K~ counts per pixel is 50. Referring 
back to the discussion of signal noise in section 5.5.2, we find that the noise 
is therefore J50 = 7, and, the minimum contrast level which can be distin­
guished in the image is given by equation 5.16, as 50%. Thus, considered as an 
image, the X-ray map is extremely poor. Compare this with the electron image 
of Figure 6.IIU), which was acquired in 100s at the same beam current of 
10-9 A. The number of backseattered electrons forming this image may be 
caleulated from equation 5.18, making an adjustment to allow for a 
128 x 128 pixel array, rather than the \000 x 1000 array assumed in that 
equation, and this works out at over 3 million detected electrons per pixel. 
This discussion elearly shows that although X-ray maps arc a very elegant way 
of displaying qualitative analytical information, they are not a practical pro­
position in most situations , and as stated above, a better and more rapid 
zzzPsgiolePfrp190 Electron microscopy and analysis 
(0) (b) 
(e) (d) 
Figure 6.11 Digital X-ray maps obtained simultaneously from a polished specimen of a hard­
facing alloy. The data were acquired in 60 minutes. (a) Silicon K~. (b) Molybdenum 
L,. (e) Chromium K,. (d) Cobalt K~. (e) Detail of (d) showing the individual 
pixels. (() A digital backscattered image of the same area. This image was acquired 
in loos. 
method of obtaining the same information is to use backseattered electron 
imaging in conjunction with X-ray spot analysis of selected areas. 
6.3.3 Practical problems of qualitative analysis 
When using any of the methods for obtaining analytical results which have just 
been discussed, it is necessary to bear in mind some practical problems which 
may arise with certain specimens. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 191 
.. 
(f) 
Figure 6. / / continued. 
Since the specimen is in a scanning electron microscope it must have a 
conducting surface (unless a low-voltage microscope is being used). Non-con­
ducting specimens must therefore be coated before being examined. The 
coating, however, will absorb X-rays as they arc emilled from the specimen 
and it will also emit its own characteristic X-rays. Consequently the coating 
should be as thin as possible, be of as Iowan atomic weight as possible, and it 
must not contain an element which might be of interest in the specimen. For 
these reasons, gold, which is generally used for SEM work, is less suitable as a 
coating material than carbon if the specimen is to be analysed. 
Another important point is that as X-rays, unlike secondary electrons, travel 
in straight lines from the specimen to the detector, we will not detect X-rays 
from regions of the specimen which arc not in the line of sight of the detector. 
Therefore on rough specimens we must be careful to interpret this as a topo­
graphical effect rather than one due to a variation of chemical composition 
across the specimen. An extreme example of this effect is shown in Figure 
6.12(b), where an X-ray map of oxidized copper spheres, taken with oxygen 
K" X-rays is shown. Comparison of (a) the secondary electron image and (b) 
the X-ray map clearly shows that the apparent variation of oxygen level is 
purely a topographic effect. For this reason it is preferabl e to work, where 
possible, with flat specimens for analysis. 
Another important point arises from the fact that X-rays originate deep in 
the specimen, and therefore we may detect X-rays from regions which arc not 
visible in the electron image. For example, as seen in Figure 6.13(a) and (b), we 
may find that X-rays from an unseen phase below the surface arc being 
collected. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp(0) 
(b) 
Figure 6./2 (0) Secondary elearon micrograph and (b) oxygen K~ distribution map from 
oxidized copper spheres. The apparent variation of oxygen content across the 
spheres is a topographic effect in which X-rays from one side of the spheres 
cannot reach the crystal spectrom eter. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 193 
(oj (b, «, 
Figure 6. / 3 Three common situations in which a false impression of local composition can be 
obtained. (a) In a region apparently consisting entirely of A, a region of B below 
the surface emits B X-rays. (b) Near the boundary between phases A and B, both 
types of X-ray are excited although the electron beam appears to be on the B 
phase. (c) In a rough specimen. B X-rays may be excited by fluorescence from the 
A region. 
Figure 6.13(c) shows another source of error which is particularly important 
for rough specimens. X-rays or high energy electrons emilled from the 
specimen may subsequently hit other areas of the specimen or even other 
parts of the microscope. and excite X-rays by fluorescence from these 
regions. This may of course produce a misleading analysis. WDS analysis is 
less prone to this problem than EDS analysis as the X-ray beam is well 
collimated by the spectrometer slits. 
6.4 X-ray analysis of thin specimens in the TEM 
We have seen in this chapter that X-ray analysis in the SEM or electron probe 
mieroanalyser is a very powerful analytical technique with much higher spatial 
resolution than conventional analytical methods. However, as discussed 
earlier, the spatial resolution is limited to the size of the sampling volume 
which is around 111m -much worse than the resolution of the electron micro­
scope when used for electron imaging. There arc many important features of a 
specimen which arc much smaller than 1 ~lm, and there has consequently been a 
great deal of effort in developing methods of X-ray analysis with higher spatial 
resolution. 
The problem may be overcome as shown schematically in Figure 6.14, by 
using thin specimens. Although the shape of the interaction volume depends 
somewhat on electron energy and the atomic number of the specimen, it is 
typically as shown in Figure 6.14(a), the lateral spread of the electron beam 
increasing with the depth of penetration. Therefore in a sufficiently thin 
specimen, as shown in Figure 6.14(b), the beam spread is much less. The 
shape of the truneated cone may be calculated, or determined from Monte 
Carlo simulation (see e.g. I-!ren ef aI., 1979), and for thin speeimens, the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp194 Electron microscopy and analysis 
, , , , , , 
, , , , 
, , 
, --
(0) (b) 
Figure 6. /4 A comparison ci the size of the region from which X-rays are excited in (a) a solid 
specimen. and (b) a thin specimen. 
beam spread (in nm) is given by 
B ~ O· (98(21 E)I pi A) 'I' 1'1' 16.3) 
where Z = atomic number, A = atomic weight, E = electron energy (keV), 
p = density (g!cm), and r = thickness (nm). 
Examples of beam spread for a range of materials are shown in Figure 6.15. 
Many transmission electron microscopes are now filled with EDS detectors 
so that chemical information as well as microstructural information may be 
obtained from thin specimens. One of the important consequenc es of using a 
very thin specimen is that the number of X-rays emillcd is much smaller than 
for a bulk specimen, and it is this factor which often limits the spatial resolu­
tion of thin film analysis. 
Co 
~ 
! 0", ~ , 
" i "" , 
e 
.~ "" • 
,o. 
o '00 '00 
Be.m spread (nm) 
Figure 6./5 The effect ci specimen composition and thickness on the lateral beam spread of 
IOOkeV electrons in a thin specimen. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 195 
In order to maximize the collection efficiency we need to place as large a 
detector as possible, close to the specimen. However, it is not as easy to do this 
in a TEM as in an SEM, as the specimen is located within the objective lens. In 
most cases, use of an EDS detector requires the objective lens of the TEM to be 
fitted with pole-pieces with a wider gap than normal, with some loss of image 
resolution. Detectors are either mounted horizontally, or near horizontally 
through the polepiece gap, in which case the specimen must be tilted in 
order to allow X-rays to enter the detector, or clse, if the geometry of the 
lens allows, an inclined detector is fitted. One of the advantages of a steeply 
inclined detector is that a specimen which is being examined in the TEM need 
not be specially tilted for analysis, and therefore any special diffracting con­
ditions needed for imaging can be maintained. However, as larger-diameter 
detectors can usually be accommodated in the horizontal or near horizontal 
position, there are advantages for this geometry as wcll. It is not uncommon 
for microscopes to be fitted with detectors in both the positions, and the 
spectra of Figure 6.6 were acquired in such an instrument. The inclined 
detector had a standard beryllium window, and the horizontal detector was 
an ultra-thin window detector. 
As discussed in Chapter 4, the electron beam in a TEM is normally not 
focused, but illuminates a large area of the specimen. In order to obtain X­
ray analysis with high spatial resolution, the beam must only impinge on the 
area to be analysed, and therefore a fine focused probe must be used. There are 
two ways in which this is commonly done. STEM attachments for transmission 
microscopes have been available for a number of years. In order to fulfil their 
function, they need to be able to form fine electron probes, typically of 
diameters down to '"" I nm. Therefore, using such an attachment, X-ray 
analysis of a spot, line, or area of a specimen can be carried out in the same 
way as in an SEM, except that the area of interest is normally located by 
imaging in STEM. One of the problems of using this type of equipment at 
the highest spatial resolutions is that on changing from STEM mode to a 
stationary spot mode for analysis, it is difficult to know exactly whereabouts 
on the specimen the spot is located to an accuracy of better than perhaps 
IOnm. Thus we can analyse a small volume of the specimen, but we arc 
sometimes not sure exactly where it is! 
In the latest generation of transmission electron microscopes, a very small 
probe (down to a diameter of 2 nm, or even less) can be formed when the 
microscope is in normal TEM imaging mode. Thus the area of interest can 
be located by TEM imaging, and the beam size can be reduced until it is 
smaller than the area to be analysed.· 
• You should he careful to ask exactly what is meant hy 'heam diameter'. Usually this refers to the 
rull width at half maximum (FWHM ) of a Gaussian distrihution or electrons. Howel"er. this 'hcam 
diameter" only contains 50% of the electrons. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp196 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Using either method, a spot size of less than 5 nm can readily be obtained, 
and therefore, if thin enough specimens arc used (Figure 6.15), it should 
perhaps be possible to analyse areas of this diameter. However, the low 
current in such small probes (equation 5.13) combined with the small 
number of X-rays generated in such thin specimcns, mcans that in a convcn­
tional TEM far too fcw X-rays to carry out a meaningful analysis can be 
collected. Therefore in a TEM or TEMjSTEM instrument, the minimum 
spatial resolution for analysis, which will of course depend on the nature of 
the specimen and the concentration of the elcmcnt being analysed, is obtained 
by optimizing the probe size and specimen thickness so as to obtain a sufficient 
signal. For a TEMjSTEM instrument it is difficult to obtain a spatial resolu­
tion of much less than 10 nm for a typical specimcn. Use of highcr brightness 
electron guns, particularly the field emission gun in a dedicated STEM or 
FEGTEM instrument (Chapter 7) enables substantially better resolution to 
be obtained with suitable specimens. 
In addition to the low count rate discussed above, there are one or two 
problems associated with TEM-bas ed analysis which have to be weighed 
against the great advantages of a small selectcd area of analysis. In thin 
specimens, the 'surface' region may be a significant fraction of the total 
volume analysed, and it is thcrefore particularly important that the specimen 
is prepared in such a way that the surface chemistry is unaltered. Great care 
must be taken with elcctropolishe d metals, ion beam thinned materials and 
biological specimens to avoid this problem. 
A further troublesome effect is the fluorescence or backscattered electron 
excitation of X-rays from the specimen holder and microscope column. The 
specimen in a TEM is much more closely surrounded by metal objects than is 
usually the case in the SEM, and mechanisms such as that illustrated in Figure 
6.13(c) therefore oecur frequently. These problems can be alleviated but not 
entirely cured by using a specimen and support grids made of carbon or 
beryllium. These then emit only very soft X-rays which are not normally 
detected, and therefore do not interfere with the analysis. 
The applications of thin film analysis are widespread in the fields of materials 
science and biology, and many examples of the use of the technique will be 
found in the further reading section at the end of the book. Two fairly typical 
applications to materials arc shown in Figurcs 6.16 and 6.17. 
6.5 Quantitative analysis in an electron microscope 
In our discussion of analysis up to this point we have been concerned only with 
the detection of clements in the specimen, i.e. qualitative analysis. There arc 
many occasions when it would be highly desirable to know more about the 
specimen in a quantitative way. 
For instance, three questions which are often of importance arc: 'What is the 
size and shape of the region which has bcen analysed?', 'What is the smallest 
zzzPsgiolePfrp50nm .. .. 
('J 
Intensity 
c, 
A, 
B, Au+Br 
B, 
o 5 10 15 k,y 
(b J 
Figure 6./6 Analysis of ultrafine gold particles. (a) The EDS spectrum . (b) from a single 3nm 
partide. shows that there is a small amount of bromine associated with each par­
tide (C. J. Kiely and J. Fink. University of Liverpool). 
zzzPsgiolePfrpA-- ___ _ ,-------. 
o Ipm 
'of 
, 
I I I 
'" , -• , -
0 , 
~ " I i , 
8 " < I , 
! < u " , I 
I 
" 
'w '" w 0 " '00 '" Oi,to"". from g,ai~ bound.ry {nm) 
,bf 
Figure 6. / 7 Thin film EDS analysis used to measure the depletion of chromium at a grain 
boundary in an austenitic stainless steel. This phenomenon makes such an alloy 
susceptible to stress corrosion. (a) Transmission electron micrograph showing a 
grain boundary containing partides of chromium carbide. (b) Chromium concen­
trations in the matrix determined from spot analyses as the boundary is traversed 
from A to B. (M. G. Lackey. Imperial College. London) 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 199 
amount of element X which could be detected?' and 'How much of this element 
is present in this part of the specimen?' To find even an approximate answer to 
any of these questions requires a far deeper consideration of what happens 
inside the specimen as the X-rays arc first generated and then partially 
absorbed again, than we have so far had space for. All we can hope to 
achieve in this section is some understanding of why these questions are 
difficult to answer precisely and what sort of order of magnitude the answers 
are likely to have. 
Let us take the rolllllle analysed first. Obviously, it is that region from which 
the X-rays which reach the detector arc emillcd. As we have seen at the 
beginning of this chapter this must depend on where the X-rays are 
generated (i.e. how far the electron beam penetrates the sample) and how 
strongly the X-rays arc absorbed by the specimen on the way out. The 
volume is therefore going to depend on the electron beam energy, the 
average atomic weight of the sampling volume, the wavelength of the char­
acteristic X-rays being studied, the absorption coefficients of the specimen for 
these X-rays and the angle of incidence of the electrons on the surface, to 
mention only the five most obvious factors. Another confusing point is that, 
of the X-rays emilled, more will probably come from ncar the surface than will 
be able to escape from deeper inside the specimen. The analysis is therefore not 
uniformly representative of the whole sampling volume. Since we would have 
to make a large number of not very accurate assumptions in order to calculate 
theoretically the volume analysed, this is not normally allempted. The analyst 
has to be content with knowing that the analysis from a bulk specimen is likely 
to come from a volume of about 111m x 111m x 111m, or, as seen from Figure 
6.15, much less from a thin specimen. It is up to the analyst to select the 
appropriate technique and operating conditions to ensure that the sampling 
volume is smaller than the region of interest. 
6,5,' The limit of detectabilit y 
The minimum limit of detection for any element in a specimen is of particular 
importance when small eoncentrations arc suspect cd. It is not of much use to 
be told 'iron cannot be dctected in your sample', unless this cnablcs us to put 
an upper limit on the amount which could be present. The microanalyst 
therefore never gives this answer, but instead says that 'there must be less 
than (say) 0·1% of iron in your specimen'. X-ray counts, like other signals in 
the SEM, arrive at random, and we can only detect a peak in the spectrum if it 
is discernible from the background. The analysis of this situation is therefore 
analogous to the discussions in section 5.5.2 of the minimum discernible 
contrast level in an image. 
If the mean count level of the background is fJ, then the noise, or variation 
about this mean is IN. It is usually accepted that a peak can be recognized if 
it rises above the background level by at least 2JfJ. If the count rate in the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp200 Electron microscopy and analysis 
background is h counts pcr second, and if the counting timc IS r, then 
the background level is br, and the smallest detectable peak IS 2J(bt) 
above the background. What concentration of an element in the specimen 
would give this peak? To answer this we must compare our peak height with 
the peak height (P -8) given by a standard specimen consisting of the pure 
element. To a first approximation the minimum detectable concentration 
(M DC) is given by; 
MDC lOO(P-B)specimen 200Vbt . h "' = = welgt/o 
(P -B)pure ,(andard pI -hI 
where p is the peak count rate on 
slightly we get the pure element standard. Simplifying this 
MOe = 200..jh % 
(1' -h),fi ( 6.4) 
Clearly, if we wish to lower the MOe we ean, according to equation 6.4, reduce 
b, increase p, or increase r. Thc easiest of these is to increase the timc of 
analysis. A comparison of Figures 6.6(h) and 6.6(c) which were obtained in 
timcs of 50 sand 300 s rcspectively clearly shows how a longer counting time 
allows smaller peaks to be identified. However, it becomes impractical to count 
for longer than about lOOOs, not only because this would make a series of 
analyses very time consuming, but also because the beam intensity does not 
stay constant indefinitely, even on the best instruments, and if it varies percept­
ibly it will no longer be valid to compare the counts from the specimen with 
those from the standard, since they cannot be obtained under the same 
conditions. 
The other ways of improving the MOe really depend on the design and 
functioning of the analysis and detector system. EOS systems have poorer 
peak-to-background ratios than WOS systems, and both systems have worse 
peak-to-background ratios for the lighter elements. For all but the lighter 
elements , the MOe using an EDS system is around 0·1%, and that using 
WOS, an order of magnitude lower. However, the precise figure will depend 
on the atomic weight of the trace element compared to that of the specimen, 
because, as will be discussed in the next section, the soft X-rays from a light 
element will be strongly absorbed by a matrix of high atomic weight. 
6.5.2 Quantitative analysis of bulk specimens 
The principle of quantitative analysis is simple, and we have implicitly made 
use of it in discussing the minimum detection limit. To estimate the amount of 
an clement present we determine the number of characteristic X-ray counts 
from the specimen in a fIXed time interval, Nspec, and compare this figure with 
the number arriving from a standard of known composition in a similar time, 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 201 
N,{d. The concentration of this element in the specimen, 
given by 
C -N,pee x C -,-x C spee - SId - s{d 
Ns{d Cspee, should then be 
( 6.5) 
where C,{d is the aecurately known concentration of this element in the 
standard, and each value of N is a peak count minus a background count. 
The background in an EDS spectrum varies continuously across the spectrum 
as may be seen in Figure 6.6, and accurate determination of the background 
level for any peak is not simple, although various modelling and filtering 
routines have been developed to aecomplish this task. 
As the two counts NspIX and NS1d have to be collected at different times, we 
must be certain that the analysis conditions have not changed between analysis 
of the specimen and the standard. This calls for a great deal of care, both in 
designing electron microprobe analysers and using them, in order to ensure 
that, in particular , the electron beam current remains constant for long periods. 
Even if this problem is overcome, we find that equation 6.5 is totally 
inadequate for the caleulation of concentrations. 
Most of the complicating factors arise because, inevitably, the specimen is 
not the same as the standard. In the most usual cases a specimen containing 
several elements is compared with a series of standards, each of which is a pure 
element, and the specimen is therefore likely to differ from each standard in its 
density and in the average atomic weight of its constituent atoms. The con­
sequence of these differences is that equation 6.4 may need correcting for some 
of, or, in the worst cases, all of the three factors known as atomic number effect 
(2), absorption (A) andjluorescence (F). Use of these corrections is commonly 
known as the ZAF tcchnique. Although analytical equipment suitable for 
quantitative analysis is always linked to computers equipped with the 
programs to rapidly carry out the ZAF corrections, the analyst needs to under­
stand their principle in order to ensure that the assumptions made in the ZAF 
corrections are appropriate to the analysis being carried out. 
Before considering the nature of these corrections, we will discuss the 
method by which the ZAF technique works. X-ray counts from an element 
are measured from both the specimen and the standard (which we will assume 
to be the pure element), and their ratio, k, is calculated. C,pee is given by 
C,pee=kx2xAxF ( 6.6) 
As we will find later in this section, the values of 2, A and F depend on factors 
such as the mean atomic weight of the spccimen and calculation of them 
therefore requires a prior knowledge of the specimen composition. The only 
way to proceed is to make a rough estimate of c,pee usually by taking it as k, 
(i.e. 2 = A = F = I), and to use this value to calculate approximate values of 
2, A and F. These values are then inserted into equation 6.5 and used 10 
calculate a more accurate value of Cspee, and this iterative calculation is 
zzzPsgiolePfrp202 Electron microscopy and analysis 
repeated until a constant value of c.pee results. No more than three or four 
iterations are normally required to obtain the result. None of the three correc­
tion factors can be caleulated precisely from first principles, but over the past 
40 years, approximate solutions have been obtained and continuously refined. 
The atomic lIumber correctioll, Z, is concerned with the efficiency with which 
an element generates X-rays, and this depends on two factors; (a) how far the 
electrons penetrate the specimen before they lose too much energy to excite 
further X-rays (see Figure 6.2), and (b) how many electrons arc backscattered 
without exciting any X-rays (sec Figure 5.8(a)). When the mean atomic number 
of the specimen differs considerably from that of the standard, the count rate 
for an element will not be linearly proportional to the amount present, and Z 
will therefore not be equal to I. For analysis of a heavy element in a light 
element matrix Z > I, and for a light element in a heavy element matrix Z < I. 
As an example of the magnitude of the effect, for sulphur (atomic 
number = \6) in a stainless steel (mean atomic number =27), Z is 0·87. This 
is an extreme example, and the effect is often much smaller. In determining the 
vanadium concentration (atomic number = 23) in the same steel, the correction 
factor Z is 0·99. 
The ahsorptioll correction, A, is also very important. As can be seen from 
Figure 6.2, many of the X-rays emerging from the specimen will have travelled 
a considerable distance within the solid and their intensity will have been 
reduced by absorption. The amount of the absorption depends very strongly 
on the elements in the specimen, through their mass absorption coefficient, ~t. It 
is quite likely that the specimen and the standard will have different mean 
absorption coefficients and therefore, even if X-rays were generated in 
exactly the same interaction volume in the standard and the specimen, the 
amount of absorption would differ. The magnitude of this correction can be 
quite large, especially where soft X-rays (e.g. the K lines of light elements, see 
Table 6.\) are emitted from specimens containing heavier clements. A severe 
example is the measurement of aluminium in a glass containing alumina 
(Ab03), silica (Si02) and lime (CaO). The factor A in equation 6.6 is then 
\·86. The absorption correction is often the most significant effect; for example, 
even the iron analysis in a stainless steel might need an 8% correction 
(A = \·08). The accuracy of any correction procedure depends on the values 
of p which arc used. Good experimental values are not available for all 
elements and X-ray lines (particularly for light clements) and this may be a 
limiting factor in many corrections. 
The final factor to be considered is fluorescence. From its very nature 
(see section 6.\) fluorescence cannot occur within a pure elemental 
standard. However, in a specimen containing several elements it must be con­
sidered. Fortunately fluorescence is a very ·inefficient' process and only a very 
small proportion of high energy X-rays excite lower energy fluorescent 
radiation. However, when elements of nearby atomic number are present, 
as tends to happen for example in steels (Cr = 24, Mn = 25, Fe = 26, Ni = 28) 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 203 
the fluorescence effect. which gives rise to more of the lower energy X-rays 
than would be expected, can be important. One of the worst cases is that 
of chromium in steels where a correction of 15% (F=0·85) may be 
needed. 
The application of computer correction proced ures to good results from the 
analysis of solid specimens using well characterized standards should enable 
concentrations to be calculated to about ± 2% with a WOS and ± 6% with an 
EOS. However, these results can only be obtained by extremely careful experi­
mentation and where there are large amounts of the element present (say about 
10%). Thus, although it might be possible to measure the concentration of 
copper in a brass as 70·0 ± 1·4%, the carbon content of a steel could scarcely 
be calculated and quoted better than 0·3 ±0·2% because of the low concen­
tration and the lack of aecurate values for absorption coefficients of the "soft" 
carbon K" X-rays. 
One of the most important parameters in the correction equations is the X­
ray take-off anglc (~in Figure 6.7) which determines the X-ray path lengths in 
the specimen. It is extremely important that this should be the same on both 
specimen and standard and, indeed, at all points of the specimen which are to 
be analysed. Consequently any specimen for quantitative analysis must be flat 
on the scale of the electron beam diameter. It is usual to polish specimens 
immediately before analysis with an abrasive of 111m or 0·25 11m partiele size 
so that only very fine undulations are present. A flat specimen is also virtually 
essential for WOS analysis sinee, as Figure 6.7 shows, the specimen must lie 
exactly on the Rowland eirele for efficient detection of the X-rays. A rough 
specimen could not be moved sideways at all without re-aligning it on this 
eirele which would be a great ineonvenienee. It is one of the apparently great 
advantages of the EOS detector that it is extremely insensitive to the position 
of the specimen and, therefore , rough specimens ean easily be "analysed'. 
However if a quantitative analysis is required the take-off angle must be 
known and, therefore, a polished specimen is again necessary. It is worth 
bearing in mind that even a qualitative analysis from a point on the 
specimen using an EOS can be misleading because of the effects shown in 
Figure 6. I 3(c). 
Although the preparation of the specimen is a key factor in quantitative 
analysis there are also problems associated with the standards. For many 
elements, particularly the metals, it is extremely easy to prepare a polished 
sample of the pure element. However, many of the other elements exist as 
gases, liquids or very reactive solids, and standards for these elements must 
therefore be in the form of compounds. Care must be taken 10 choose 
compound standards which are homogeneous, stoichiometrie and fully dense. 
In order to overcome these limitations much work has been done in the 1980s 
and 1990s to develop 'virtual standards". These are computer-based spectra 
which can be used, under certain carefully controlled conditions, to replace 
standard spectra. Since virtual standard spectra do not need to be collected at 
zzzPsgiolePfrp204 Electron microscopy and analysis 
the time of analysis their use speeds up the analysis process considerably as well 
as obviating the need for complicated or not very stable real standards. 
Since the major emphasis in this section has been on the quantitative analysis 
of metallic or mineral specimens, which can generally be polished flat without 
damage, it may be useful to summarize some of the problems involved in 
applying these techniques to biological material. The majority of biological 
samples are unsuitable for accurate quantitative analysis as bulk samples 
because they do not fulfil three of the essential criteria discussed earlier in 
this section: 
(a) They are rarely stable under electron bombardment, frequently changing their 
volume and their chemical nature. 
(b) They are orlen not homogeneous in composition over the interaction volume, 
which in low atomic weight material may oc as large as to 11m3. 
(c) They do not nonnally maintain a flat surface inside the microscope. 
By using standards which have chemical compositions similar to the specimen, 
some success may be achieved in favourable circumstances. However, the best 
chance of successful quantitative analysis of biological materials is in thin 
sections, using the methods described in the next section. 
6.5.3 Quantitative analysis of thin specimens 
We saw in section 6.4 that there was a significant gain in the spatial resolution 
of analysis if very thin specimens were used. Under certain circumstances 
quantitative analysis of such thin sections may also be easier to carry out 
than for bulk samples. This is because the path lengths of the X-rays in the 
specimen are so short (Figure 6.14) that the absorption and fluorescence cor­
rections necessary for bulk samples may be neglected. It has been shown by 
Cliff and Lorimer that for very thin samples 
CA = kAB NA 
CB NB (6.7) 
where NA and NB are the measured characteristic X-ray intensities, and CA and 
Cs are the weight fractions of any two clements A and B in the specimen. The 
scaling factor kAS is dependent on the two clements, the operating conditions 
and the detector response. Although it is possible to caleulate k,\B, it is more 
usual to determine it experimentally. In order to avoid determining k for all 
combinations of elements, it is more convenient to measure k for all the 
required elements in combination with a single clement, typically silicon, i.e. 
kASi, using alloys or minerals of known composition. When this set of 
constants has been evaluated, then k,\s in equation 6.6 may be replaced by 
kASi/ksS i. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 205 
As discussed in section 6.4, one of the main problems in thin-film X-ray 
analysis is the detection of spurious X-rays, and for quantitative analysis it 
is important that their level is reduced as much as possible. Having obtained 
spectra, methods of determining the characteristic X-ray intcnsities arc similar 
to those used for bulk specimens. 
The limit of dctectability of element A in a matrix of element 
Goldstein as 
C 3(2/c) 1/2 k C 
A= 'AB'B I, B is given by 
( 6.8) 
where IB is the intensity from element B and Ie is the continuum background 
for element A. Equation 6.8 shows that the detectability decreases (i.e. gets 
better) as the count rate or counting time increases. As discussed in section 6.4, 
an increased count rate in a given instrument can be achieved only with a 
thicker specimen or a probe of larger diameter. Increasing these factors will 
lead to a deterioration of spatial resolution, and if the thickness is increased too 
much then absorption and fluorescence eorreetions arc needed and the simple 
ratio method for analysis (equation 6.7) breaks down. In praetice, detectability 
limits are typically of the order of 0·I-O·5wt%. The thickness limit for which 
equation 6.7 is valid depends on the clement being analysed, and the atomic 
weight of the specimen. Typically it is of the order of 50-100 nm. 
For thicker specimens , absorption corrections may be made. The absorption 
correction depends critically on the path length in the thin film over which 
absorption occurs. This necessitates a knowledge of not only the local specimen 
thickness, but also the specimen shape and tilt, and these parameters arc often 
difficult to determine accurately. As is the case for bulk specimens, use of the 
correction requires an iterative technique. 
Despite the problems of thin film analysis, it is an extremely powerful micro­
analytical tool, and is widely used for phase identification , and the deter­
mination of elemental segregation or depletion on a fine scale as shown in 
Figure 6.17. 
Although bulk microprobe analysis is often used to determine the composi­
tion of phases in a ceramic or metallic alloy, in many cases the distribution of 
the phases is on such a fine scale that the I ~tm spatial resolution of the 
technique is inadequate. In these circumstances thin film analysis is 
extremely useful and has made many valuable contributions to the study of 
phase transformations and phase equilibria. 
6.6 Electron energy 1055 spectroscopy (EELS) 
In section 2.7 we discussed four types of inelastic scallering. If, during its 
passage through a thin specimen, an electron undergoes any of these 
processes it will suffer a loss of energy. If the energy loss is greater than 
about I eV then it is relatively simple to measure it with a magnetic 
zzzPsgiolePfrp206 Electron microscopy and analysis 
spectromctcr. This forms the basis of a powcrful way of investigating the 
nature of the specimen in a TEM. 
6.6.' The spectrometer 
An elcctron spectromctcr must obviously be mounted after thc specimen and is 
usually the final component of an analytical microscope. The principle of the 
instrumcnt is that a magnetic field is used to deflcct all thc electrons through 
about 90 degrccs. The more energctic electrons will be dcflcctcd slightly less 
and the beam will thcrefore be dispersed into a spectrum of cnergies. Figure 
6.18 illustrates this. Thcre are two ways of detecting the spectrum. If a single 
detector is available then the spectrum can be scanned across a slit, by varying 
the strength of the magnetic field, so that each encrgy is dctected in turn. This is 
known as a serial spectrometer and is shown in Figure 6.18(0). If however a 
multiple 'position-sensitive' detector is used, then the whole spectrum can be 
collected at once. This arrangement is called a parallel spectrometer and the 
technique is known as PEELS (parallel electron energy loss spectrometry) 
(Figure 6.18(h». Most early spectrometers were of the serial type. However, 
parallel detectors arc now widespread since they are intrinsically more efficient. 
Assume that we wish to count the number of electrons with one thousand 
different energies in order to build up a spectrum consisting of one thousand 
points. A serial spectrometer would spend only one thousandth of its time 
counting at anyone energy whereas a parallel spectrometer counts all 
From TEM From TEM , 
aperture ~rtUTe 
Magnetic 
(0) (b) 
Figure 6./8 Electron energy-loss spectrometers: After passing through the specimen (and the 
projector lenses of the microscope) electrons enter the spectrometer and are de­
flected by the magnetic field. In a serial spectromet er (0) a slit is used to ensure 
that only electrons of a single energy loss hit the detector. The field is then varied 
50 that each energy in turn is detected. In the parallel spectrometer (b) a position 
sensitive detector is used to collect electrons of all energies in parallel. No scanning 
of the magnetic field is then necessary . 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 207 
energies all of the time. Inefficiencies in the parallel detector itself mean that the 
advantage is not quite one thousand to one in its favour but nevertheless 
parallel detection systems are currently the dominant spectrometers. 
6.6.2 The spectrum -qualitative analysis 
An EEL (or PEEL) spectrum is conventionally considered to consist of three 
regions, shown in Figure 6.19. Those electrons (usually the majority) which 
ha ve suffered negligible inelastic scattering contribute to the =ero loss peak. The 
1011" loss region, containing electrons which have lost up to about 50eV, arises 
largely from plasmon scattering. There may be several plasmon loss peaks. The 
first, at the lowest energy loss, corresponds to those electrons which have 
excited one plasmon in their passage through the specimen. Second and 
higher plasmon peaks arise from those electrons which have excited two or 
more plasmons. Equation 2.7 can be used to calculate the relative intensities of 
plasmon peaks. In most spectra from reasonably thin specimens the first 
plasmon peak will be the most intense, with subsequent peaks getting pro­
gressively weaker. If the fourth plasmon peak can be seen the specimen must 
be quite thick and will not be very useful either for imaging or analysis. 
Plasmon peaks are not very useful for analysis because the energies at which 
they occur are similar for many materials. For analytical purposes it is more 
useful to study the c/Illracteristic ellges at higher energy losses. The number of 
electrons which suffer high energy losses is small. However the energies of the 
edges which correspond to inner shell excitation (section 2.7.4) are just as 
160 
140 
8 120 0 -" ~ 100 -• " 0 80 u • "8 60 --"8 -40 Q 
~ 
~ 
20 
0 II I ' '-F-------__ 
-0 20 40 60 
Energy loss (eV) 80 100 
Figure 6.19 A typical EEL spectrum. The zero loss and low loss and regions are evident at 
energy losses of 0 and around 20eV. but the characteristic edges are too small to 
be seen on this scale. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp208 Electron microscopy and analysis 
10 
o g _ 8 
o , , 
" , 
200 300 --
400 500 600 700 
Energy 1,,~~ feY) 
Figure 6.20 Part of an EEL spectrum from boron nitride (BN), showing the boron and nitrogen 
Kedges. 
characteristic of the element as arc X-ray peaks. It is these edges which arc 
routinely used for EELS analysis. 
Qualitative analysis is carried out by determining the energies of any edges 
which can be seen, usually between !O{)eV and 2000eV, and comparing them 
with tabulated values for the elements. Thus in Figure 6.20 the edge at 188eV 
arises from the K transition in boron while the edge at 39geV corresponds to 
nitrogen. 
Because they arise from the same electronic transitions, EELS edge energies 
will be elose to, but not exactly the same as, the energies of characteristic X­
rays. In general of course EELS (absorption) edge energies should be slightly 
higher than the corresponding X-ray (emission) peaks. One of the great 
strengths of EELS is that it can be used to detect edges from elements whose 
X-rays are too soft to be counted. Thus for example it is possible to detect 
EELS edges from helium, lithium and beryllium which are otherwise very 
difficult to analyse. 
6.6.3 Quantitative analysis 
In principle it is relatively easy to deduce from an EEL spectrum the composi­
tion of the specimen. The 'size' of each edge is proportional to the number of 
atoms of that clement in the analysed region of the specimen. 1 f we can identify 
an edge from each element in the specimen, and measure the 'size' of each edge, 
then we should be able to calculate the composition. This is indeed the basis of 
quantitative analysis, but there arc a number of reasons why it is not quite as 
simple as suggested in the above three sentences. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 209 
I 
i. 4 , 
Energy loss 
Figure 6.21 A schematic EELS edge showing the energy window fl. over which the integrated 
edge intensity is measured. The background is fitted to the region B and then 
extrapolated as shown by the dashed line. 
We must first consider the probability that electrons of the energy being used 
will excite an atom. This is deduced from the cross-section for inner shell 
excitation, defined in section 2.5. The cross-section for excitation of a particu­
lar shell (we will usc the K shell as an example) depends on the element, on the 
angular range of electrons which are aecepted into the spectrometer (J3) and on 
the energy window (n) which is to be considered (shown in Figure 6.21). 
The cross-section decreases for elements of high atomic number (equation 
2.9), but fairly obviously increases as J3 or n arc increased. A spectrometer of 
fixed J3 will show light element edges far more intense than those from even 
medium atomic weight elements. This is why, in Figure 6.20, the boron edge is 
so much bigger than the nitrogen edge. It does not mean that the specimen 
contained more boron than nitrogen. In fact there should be equal numbers of 
boron and nitrogen atoms in boron nitride. 
Inner shell cross-sections can be calculated from theory and this approaeh is 
generally used to determine a 'weighting factor' for each edge. It then remains 
to determine what is the 'size' of the edge. This is defined as the area of the 
spectrum abol'e rf,e background within the energy window n. The background 
falls very rapidly with energy, as all the speetra in this section show, so extra­
polating the background beneath each edge is difficult. The most common 
approach is to fit the curve just below the edge (i.e. at slightly lower energy 
loss) to an equation of the form A e-T
, and then to use the measured values of 
A and r to extrapolate the background beneath the edge (Figure 6.21). 
Since edges from medium atomic mass elements are so small the EELS 
technique is most powerful for analysing light elements. If not all the 
elements in the specimen arc to be determined using EELS then it is not 
possible 10 calculate the composition completely using the technique outlined 
abovc. An alternative approach is to compare the size of each edge with the 
size of the zero loss peak over the same energy window fl.. This permits the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp210 Electron microscopy and analysis 
calculation of the absolute number of atoms which contributed to the edge. 
Using this approach the relative atomic abundances of light elements in the 
specimen are easily determined. 
One of the major limitations of EELS analysis is that each edge will be 
convoluted with (i.e. broadened in the same way as) the low-loss region. In 
other words any elcctron which causes an inner shell excitation can also excite 
one or more plasmons. It will then appear at a higher energy loss in the 
resultant spectrum, resulting in a broadening of the ideal edge shape. The 
magnitude of this effect obviously gets greater as the specimen thickness 
increases. The eleanest, sharpest edges will be generated from very thin areas 
of the specimen. However it is generally impractical to analyse a region which 
is so thin that few plasmons are excited, particularly since the total signal (i.e. 
number of counts in the spectrum) will then be very small and statistical 
inaccuracies will be large. In most analyses a compromise is therefore struck 
between signal strength and edge blurring. However equation 2.7 shows that if 
the specimen thickness is equal 10 the mean free path for plasmon excitation, 
18% ofelcctrons will excite two plasmons, so the second plasmon peak will be 
quite substantial. Even at a thickness of half the mean free path the second 
plasmon peak will eontain 7% of the electrons. Since plasmon mean free paths 
are about lOOnm, the analysed region clearly needs ideally to be substantially 
thinner than this. 
6.6.4 Extra information from EEL spectra 
An EEL spectrometer is not only useful for light element analysis. It ean also 
be used to deduce more information about the specimen. We will give just two 
examples of this. Since plasmon seallering is well described by the Poisson 
equation (2.7) if a specimen is thick enough to give rise to a substantial first 
plasmon peak we can take the ratio 
p(l) ('/')'>p(-1/).) , 
p(O) "p(-'/') ). 
From the experimental ratio of the first plasmon peak intensity to the zero loss 
peak we can therefore calculate the thickness in units of the plasmon mean free 
path. Since the mean free path can be looked up or calibrated once with a 
specimen of known thickness, this is a rapid technique for determining local 
thickness. 
A second type of information is present in thejille structure before and after 
each edge. The structure near the edge is known as energy-loss near edge 
structure (ELNES) and can be quite different for an element in different 
compounds. For example, Figure 6.22 shows edges for Al in metallic 
aluminium and aluminium oxide. The shapes of the edges are quite distinct 
and enablc us to determine not just that Al is present but that it is in the 
form of aluminium oxide. The small variations in intensity after the 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 211 
L2,3 
U,3 u 
"" 150 cY 175 '--~"'-""~ "" '*25'---;1 50 eV 175 
(0) (b) 
Figure 6.22 Aluminium L2,3 edges in EELS spectra from (0) metallic aluminium and (b) alumi­
nium oxide AllO). Notice the major differences in the region before the main 
edge. Both edges have had their background removed. 
I 
Ed" 
'-XELFS 
Energy loss 
Figure 6.23 A single EELS edge showing extended fine structure (EXELFS). 
edge (EXELFS =extended energy-loss fine structure, shown schematically in 
Figure 6.23) carry information about the local environment of the atoms con­
tributing to the edge, that is about their bonding and co-ordination. The 
variation in signal is small and the signal itself needs to be strong before 
statistically reliable conelusions can be drawn. However parallel spectrometers 
arc now widely available and this technique will be increasingly useful. 
Elemental mapping can be carried out for thin specimens in much the same 
way as has been shown for solid samples in Figures 6.10 and 6.12. The X-ray 
(EOS) techniques discussed in section 6.5.3 can be used to form X-ray 
elemental maps from thin specimens. However it should always be remembered 
that the IOta I X-ray signal from a thin specimen is substantially lower than that 
from the larger volume of a thick sample so that counting statistics will be 
significantly poorer and an X-ray map from a thin specimen will usually look 
very 'noisy'. 
Elemental mapping can also be done using EELS. However the large back­
ground beneath most energy loss edges (e.g. sec Figure 6.20) means that the 
zzzPsgiolePfrp212 Electron microscopy and analysis 
contrast in such maps is rathcr low, and therefore the detection limit tends to 
be rather large. Put another way, even if there was no boron present at 188eV 
in Figure 6.20 the apparent signal from that part of the spectrum (all resulting 
from the background) would be quite large. The solution to this problem is to 
collect a full spectrum at each point of the map and subsequently to process 
each spectrum to subtract the background before displaying the image. This 
technique is rather heavy on computer power because, for a JOOO x 1000 pixel 
image you need to store \06 spectra of about 1000 data points and then 
process the J06 spectra to extract the elemental intensity or concentration 
at each point. This is rapidly becoming feasible as computing power 
becomes cheaper and it offers the huge advantage that you could go back 
to the original data long after the specimen had been taken out of the micro­
scope and reprocess the spectra to look at the distribution of another element, 
which did not appear to be of interest at the time the original data was 
collected. 
A further exciting possibility is to produce, at the microscope , energy-filtered 
images. This can currently be done in two ways. The simplest conceptually 
(although it means building a completely different TEM) is to insert an "omega 
filter" into the microscope column just after the specimen so that the remaining 
lenses form the image or diffraction pattern using only electrons of a selected 
energy. This enables the microscopist to select an elemental image or a plasmon 
image or a diffraction pallern with no inelastically scattered background for 
instance. The alternative method, which involves less modification to the 
microscope, is to use a series of lenses and slits after the conventional EELS 
spectrometer 10 reconstruct the image using only the electrons which have been 
selected by the spectrometer. The most familiar version of this is known as a 
GIF, for Gatan Imaging Filter. Both techniques arc likely to become more 
widespread. 
6.7 A brief comparison of techniqu es 
In this chapter we have dealt with the most commonly available analytical 
techniques associated with SEM and TEM. We have not been concerned with 
Auger electron spectroscopy, which has a great deal to offer but which is 
treated in Chapter 7. We have shown that X-ray analysis of solid samples 
is now a standard quantitative technique, extending to all elements down to 
boron in the periodic table. For the analysis of thin specimens there are two 
techniques, EDX and EELS, of which EDX is currently slightly more versatile 
in that it can more easily deal with a range of elements throughout the 
periodic table (boron upwards). However EELS can be used to analyse 
very light clements (helium upwards) and has a number of other uses 111 
addition 10 chemical analysis. Elemental mapping is available using a 
variety of techniques. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChemical analysis in the electron microscope 213 
6.8 Questions 
I You have available an analytical microscope with an EDX detector and 
maximum elcctron energy of20kV. Using the data in Table 6.1 suggest which 
line you would use to analyse for P, Mo, Cr and Os. 
2 The energy required to excite an electron-hole pair in a silicon EDS detector is 
3·8eY. Calculate the number of pairs likely to be generated by a Be K" X-ray 
and a Zr K" X-ray and give two reasons why the analysis of beryllium is likely 
to be less aecurate than analysis of zirconium. 
3 During EDX analysis using K lines, which elements might be spuriously 
detected 
(a) in Cr because of an escape peak 
(b) in Al because of a sum peak? 
Can you find, from Table 6.1, any other escape or sum peaks which might 
easily be misinterpreted? 
4 In a crystal spectrometer (\vDX) what is the approximate interplanar spacing 
which is needL-d tin the curved crystal (Figure 6.7) to detect and analyse: 
(a) the Fe Kline 
(b) the Ti L line? 
What sort of crystal is suitable for analyses using the Ti L line? 
5 Beam spreading in a thin specimen is given by equation 6.3. A 100 keY beam 
of diameter 5 nm is uscd to analyse small particles in a copper sp<:cimen of 
thickness 200 nm. What is the effective diameter of the beam when it emerges 
from the specimen? How would you eXIX-oct the position of the particle in the 
specimen (i.e. at the top, middle or bollom) to affect (a) a single spot analysis 
with the beam stationary, and (b) an elemental map formL-d with a scamK-d 
beam. The density of eopper is 8.96gcm-3 and its atomic mass is 63·5. 
6 An aluminium -copper sample is being analysed using EDX. The pure Al 
standard gives a count rate of 2000 cps while the background intensity away 
from the Al K peak is 25 cps. Estimate the minimum detectable concentration 
of copper in this sample using an analysis time of (a) 0·15; (b) lOs, and 
(c) 10 min. 
7 Williams and Carter state as a guideline for EELS that ·if the intensity in the 
first plasmon peak is grcater than one-tenth of the zero-loss intensity, then 
your specimen is too thick for analysis'. If you are analysing an aluminium­
based material with a plasmon mean free path of 120 nm, what is the 
maximum useful thickness of your specimen? Assume that all energy loss is 
accounK-d for by plasmon stallering (not too bad an assumption in most 
cases). 
zzzPsgiolePfrpChapter 7 
Electron microscopy and 
other techniques 
We have described in earlier chaplers the basic techniques of scanning and 
transmission microscopy and diffraction. There arc now many other tcchniques 
available for characterizing materials, each of which has some special 
advantage. In this final chapler an attempt is made to outline some of the 
most important techniques which can be used to complement electron micro­
scopy and to point oul the areas of overlap between the techniques. We also try 
to indicate how electron microscopy is developing, often in response 10 devel­
opments in other areas. Most modern investigations, particularly in the 
materials sciences, exploit more than one technique and it is important 10 
know what each can offer, even if one cannot bc expcrt in all of them. 
7.1 Complementary imaging techniques 
All imaging techniques use one of only two basic principles: Either the whole 
field of view is illuminated and lenses are used to form a whole field image (i.e. 
the pixels are examined in parallel), or the field of view is interrogated and the 
image is displayed point by point, usually by scanning (i.e. the pixels are 
examined in series). In this book we have concentrated on one main example 
of each of the types, the TEM (parallel imaging) and the SEM (serial imaging). 
In the remainder of this final chapter we will describe (rather briefly) a number 
of other microscopes -you should bear in mind that all of them conform to 
one or other of the two basic types. Nearly all of the newer techniques use serial 
imaging. The differences among them lie in two main areas; the nature of the 
illumination (light. electrons, ions or whatever), and the nature of the signal 
which is used to form the image or extract analytical information (light. 
electrons. ions, X-rays or whatever). The details of how the image is formed, 
that is how the scanning is achieved or how the lenses work, are less important 
at this stage than a elear understanding of the nature of the illumination and 
the imaging signal, since these tell us in principle the useful range of the 
technique. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 215 
from Out-of-focus 
pl~ 
-_ i+--------illumination ___ ':"_ ------------
system ..-... "-J-f-'" ---
In-focus 
plane ---, , -, -, , --------;;:<-----
--, --, - ' 
Confocal 
aperture 
Figure 7. / A schematic diagram of the key elements of a confocal microscope. 
7.1.' Confocal light microscopy ,. 
imaging 
system 
A major limitation of conventional light microscopy is that its depth of field is 
usually rather small. Anyone who has uscd a light microscopc will be familiar 
with thc narrow rangc in which the specimen appcars in focus. For the 
biologist and others using transparcnt specimcns thc problem is compoundcd 
by the fact that one region of the specimcn is in focus while othcrs, which may 
be just as bright. are out of focus and appear blurred. 
The very simple way round this problem, the use of ·confocal ' optical 
systems, was discovered in thc 1950s but we had to wait until the 1990s for 
thc technology of lascrs, computers and control theory to come together to 
produce user-friendly confocal microscopes. Thesc arc now sprcading rapidly 
into many ficlds of science. 
The basic confocal principle is very simple and is shown in Figure 7.1. Small 
apertures arc used to ensure that only the light from the in-focus region of the 
specimen reaches the imaging part of the optical system. Thus the solid (in 
focus) rays form the image while the dotted (out of focus) rays arc largely 
stopped by the aperture and contribute almost nothing to the image. The 
difficulty which accounted for the thirty year delay in putting this simple 
idea into practice is that only one point of the specimen can be genuinely 
confocal at a time. There therefore has to be a scanning system to illuminate 
one point of the specimen at a time. Since users arc very interested in trans­
parent objects the focused spot has to be scanned in three dimensions (i.e. 
through the thickness of the specimen as well as from side to side) and the 
3D image has to be stored in a computer for later viewing. This is now easily 
done, using lasers and computer-controlled positioning devices, and confocal 
microscopes are readily available commercially. There arc still a number of 
different ways of actually performing the necessary scanning, and a varicty of 
imaging modes including fluorescence, but we will not deal with them here. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp216 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Sheppard and Shotton (1997) give a more detailed introduetion to these teeh­
niques. Confocal microscopes arc now widely used by biologists but also by 
materials scientists who need to study the topography of non-flat specimens at 
the resolution offered by the light microscope without having to put them in 
the vacuum of an SEM. 
7.'.2 Scanned probe microscopies 
For almost twenty years, from 1965 to the mid 1980s, the imaging of surfaces 
at a resolution better than that provided by a light microscope was dominated 
by the SEM. Alternative methods, including reflection electron microscopy, 
were available for the whole of that time but they were on the whole not 
refined into useful high resolution techniques. However since the invention 
of the scanning tunnelling microscope there has been an explosion in the 
area of scanned probe techniques. The atomic force microscope (AFM) has 
become almost as ubiquitous as the SEM and many other variants of the basic 
technique have been developed. In this section we will describe the basic 
principle of the techniques and give a brief review of the range now available. 
Scanning tunnelling microscopy 
The scanning technique which opened up the new range of techniques is 
scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). Since the publication of the first 
edition of this book, the technique has been invented, developed, refined and 
marketed to many laboratories around the world. Its inventors won (jointly 
with one of the inventors of electron microscopy) the Nobel Prize for Physics in 
1987. 
STM relies, as its name implies, on the effect known as quantum mechanical 
tunnelling. The electron distribution of a solid conductor overlaps the surface 
and extends (slightly) into free space. If two solids are brought so elose that 
their electron distributions overlap then a current (the tunnelling current) can 
flow if a potential is applied between them. The magnitude of the tunnelling 
current depends very sensitively (exponentially) on the spacing between the 
solids; it may change by three orders of magnitude as the spacing changes 
by one atomic diameter. It is the strength of the tunnelling current which 
provides the signal in an STM. 
The experimental layout is shown in Figure 7.2. A probe in the form of a 
very sharp point is scanned, mechanically, across the surface to be studied. As 
the height of the surface changes, because of surface steps or even the 'bumps' 
due to individual atoms, the tunnelling current changes. Its magnitude is sensed 
by the electronics and used to control a feedback system which alters the gap 
between the probe and the specimen until the pre-set tunnelling current is 
restored. This mechanism gives us an electron microscope with no 'primary 
beam', no 'secondary effect' and no lenses! The display effectively shows the 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 217 
Figure 7.2 A very simplified diagram of a scanning tunnelling microscope (STM). As the tip is 
scanned across the specimen surface the tunnelling current (i) is modified. A feed­
back system is used to maintain the current. and hence the gap. at the same value. 
The tip thus follows the surface contours and its vertical displacement can be used 
to map the surface topography on a very fine scale. 
vertical displacement of the tip as the specimen is scanned and is similar in 
many ways to a conventional SEM micrograph, showing a detailed image of 
the surface topography. It has already proved possible to image the positions 
of individual atoms on surfaces and thus to see dircctly what might be called 
the 'surface crystallography". 
I! might seem amazing that the tip of the probe can be made sharp enough 
and that it can be moved sensitively enough through such small distances. In 
fact it has proved easier to achieve these feats than either the original designers , 
Binnig and Rohrer, or other early workers imagined. The probe docs not have 
to be particularly sharp since only its most protruding alOm will be brought to 
within tunnelling distance of the specimen. Movement of the probe in all three 
directions (x and y for scanning, = for control of the gap) is achieved by 
mounting it on piezoelectric crystals. Small voltage changes cause these 
crystals to expand or contract, thus moving the probe in a predictable 
fashion. Some precautions have to be taken to isolate the probe and 
specimen from vibration but these have proved not to be difficult. The STM 
has rapidly undergone a similar design evolution to most novel instruments ; at 
first it seemed complex and was over-designed, then it was realized that the 
design could be simplified. STMs have been installed inside the chamber of a 
conventional SEM, inside semiconducto r growth chambers and in other 
locations where they arc at the heart of the experiment. No technique is 
totally idiot-proof but STM and its derivatives arc now straightfo rward 
enough that any laboratory can use them. 
Atomic (orce microscopy 
Once the concept of the STM had been shown to work, the idea was quickly 
extended (and often simplified) to develop other techniques for revealing 
zzzPsgiolePfrp218 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Laser beam 
, ,--­
Scan Knsitivc 
dete(:tor 
Figure 7.3 The elements of an atomic force microscope (AFM). Vertical deflections of the canti­
lever are detected as the reflected laser beam is deflected. 
surface topography on a very fine scale. One of the techniques which has 
rapidly found widespread use is atomic force microscopy (AFM). 
A fine tip, like that of an STM, is mounted on a cantilever beam. As this is 
brought up to the surface of the specimen it will be held at a constant distance 
by the interatomic forces between the atoms of the tip and those of the 
specimen surface. When the specimen is scanned, using piezoelectric crystals 
just as in the STM, the cantilever beam will rise and fall with the surface 
topography of the specimen. This vertical movement of the tip can be 
detected and measured very sensitively by reflecting a small laser beam from 
the cantilever, as shown schematically in Figure 7.3. The sensitivity of this 
technique is such that vertical deflections of significantly less than 0·1 nm can 
be detected, so surface steps only one atom high can be resolved quite easily. 
Lateral resolution on this scale is also possible, so the AFM genuinely has 
atomic resolution in all three dimensions. Figure 7.4 shows a typical image. 
One amazing feature of AFM is that there is no special requirement for the 
specimen to be in a vacuum. In fact most AFM work is carried out in air, and 
good images can even be obtained under water or other liquids. The AFM 
therefore competes well with the SEM on cost and ease of use, and surpasses it 
in resolution. However all A FM images req uire computer processing and inter­
pretation of these images is not as straightforward as with an SEM. Nor is its 
low magnification performance as good as that of an SEM, so both tcchniques 
will remain useful for many years. 
A simple extension of the AFM is the magnetic force microscope (MFM) 
where the dominant force between tip and specimen results from their magnetic 
interaction. M FMs are now widely used to study magnetic materials. 
Another clever development of the scanning probe idea also overcomes one 
of the apparent fundamental limits of microscopy using light. Near field optical 
microscopy (NFOM) uses a fine optical fibre tip to bring light to the scanned 
specimen. The light source is held so close to the specimen (as with STM and 
AFM) that the specimen is in the 'ncar field' and many of the usual rules of 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 219 
Figure 7.4 AFM image showing InAs islands on a GaAs substrate. (Lim Chee Han, University of 
Liverpool) 
optics no longer apply. The physics of this is complicated, but essentially if 
both the diameter of the tip which is emit ting the light and the distance between 
the tip and the specimen arc smaller than the wavelength of the light, then 
microscopy can be performed using light at a resolution much smaller than the 
value of about half its wavelength implied by equation 1.4. This concept has 
been shown to work, but microscopes based on the NFOM principle are 
difficult to use and are still only to be found in a few research laboratories. 
7.1.3 Field ion microscopy 
The TEM is not yet able to image single point defects in crystalline specimens 
(although the STEM used in Z-contrast mode is almost there). The presence of 
vacancies and interstitial atoms has largely been deduced indirectly. The field 
ion microscope (FlM) permits some individual atoms and point defects to be 
imaged and thus extends the range of imaging techniques. In the FIM a high 
potential is applied between a very fine pointed specimen of tip radius r and a 
screen at a distance R (Figure 7.5(0». In the intervening space a low pressure of 
inert gas is maintained: gas atoms arc ionized in the very high field ncar the 
surface of the specimen. Each ion is then accelerated towards the screen, where 
it contributes a speck of light to the image. Ionization occurs preferentially 
zzzPsgiolePfrp220 Electron microscopy and analysis 
(. ) 
(b) coolant 
Vacuum 
P=P' A 
F 
T R 
H 
Figure 7.5 (a) The schematic layout of a field ion microscope. A high voltage is applied between 
the fluorescent screen (F) and the fine tip of the specimen (T). For atom probe analy­
sis ions. which have been evaporated from the specimen tip. can pass through the 
hole (H) and enter a time-of-flight mass spectrom eter. (b) Atom positions in a field 
ion microscope tip. loniution of the imaging gas occurs above protruding atoms 
such as those marked A. 
above those atoms which protrude from the specimen surface (e.g. at A in 
Figure 7.S(b» and the image on the fluorescent screen thus consists of a 
pallern of bright spots corresponding to prominent individual atoms in the 
specimen. Two examples of FIM micrographs from crystalline specimens are 
shown in Figure 7.6. The magnification of an FIM image is simply R/r and 
hence in order to make atoms visible (i.e. to make their image bigger than 
0·1 mm) r. the radius of the tip of the specimen, must be less than 111m. In 
fact the radius is likely to be significantly smaller than I ~lm; although images 
such as those shown in Figure 7.6 can be used to study single vacancies and 
grain boundary or dislocation structures in terms of atomic arrangements, only 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 221 
{,} 
{b} 
Figure 7.6 Field ion micrographs from (0) tungsten and (b) iridium. Image (a) shows the pres­
ence of a dislocation . since the spots lie on a spiral. not in concentric circles. Image 
(b) shows two vacant lattice sites as dark spots in the centre ci the white box U. A. 
Hudson. T. J. Godfrey and G. D. W. Smith) 
a minute region of the specimen can be studied. The method is restricted to 
specimens with an electrically conducting or semiconducting matrix (so that 
the potential can be applied) and there are obvious difficulties in ensuring that 
the structures observed are representative of the bulk material. 
Nevertheless the FIM offers one of the only simple ways of extending the 
resolution available in the TEM down to atomic dimensions. An extension of 
zzzPsgiolePfrp222 Electron microscopy and analysis 
the technique (APFIM) also offers atom by atom analysis, and this is discussed 
in section 7.2.1. 
7. 1.4 Developments in electron microscopy 
Many of the recent advances in electron microscopy have been stimulated by 
two developments , neithcr of which has actually rcquired any great ad vance in 
the microscope itself or in the physics which underlies it. The most obvious 
development has been in the power of computing, which has enabled micro­
scopists to perform many feats which, although possible prcviously, would 
have taken far too long a time to be worthwhile. An example is the modern 
ability to subtract the background from an X-ray or EELS map (section 6.3.2) 
before it is displayed: no new principle is involvcd but without a computcr such 
image manipulation would be ridiculously time-consuming. The second devel­
opmcnt was the realization that during 'ordinary' electron microscopy many 
potcntially useful signals arc generated. Instead of ignoring these signals the 
modern microscopist attempts to exploit them, using a multi-signal approach, 
to extract more information from a single experiment. As a very elementary 
example, thirty years ago the generation of characteristic X-rays or backseat­
tered electrons from a TEM specimen was totally ignored, although both 
processes were well understood. Nowadays such analytical techniques arc 
commonplace. Ten years ago it took, perhaps, onc hour to solve a backseat­
tered or Kikuchi pattern. Now this is donc in 0·1 s and this has effectively made 
a new analytical techniquc available. 
Scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) 
Thc best known development in electron microscopy in recent years has been 
the STEM. This technique, as has been discussed in earlier chapters (sections 
4.4 and 5.9.3), combines TEM and SEM by collecting a transmission image by 
the scanning method, and is ideally suited to a multi-signal approach. Since the 
resolution of a scanning technique is limited by the diameter of the probing 
beam, in order to achieve good resolution with a STEM a very 
fine electron probe is needed. It has proved possible, using the field emission 
electron gun (FEG, section 2.3), to gcnerate electron probes which carry 
a current approaching 10-10 A in a beam of diameter only 0.2 nm 
(2 x 1O-lOm). This is sufficient to image fairly heavy single atoms in ideal 
non-crystalline specimens, and this achievement was responsible for the enthu­
siastic development of STEM instruments. 
By invoking the principle of reciprocity (section 1.4) it is possible to show 
that, if the conditions of beam convergence and imaging aperture angle are 
equivalent, a STEM image should show identical contrast to a conventional 
TEM image. It was hoped in the early days of STEM that images could be 
obtained from thicker specimens than was possible in a TEM. This apparent 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 223 
E 
A--
c c 
Figure 7.7 A schematic diagram of a scanning transmission microscope (STEM). The field emis­
sion gun (FEG) at the bottom provides a beam of electrons which is focused by the 
lens(es) L and scanned by the coils C before interacting with the specimen S.ln the 
sample chamber around the specimen there may be an X-ray detector X. an 
energy loss spectrometer E and an annular dark field electron detector A in addition 
to the conventiona l transmitted electron detector. 
advantage is illusory since images from a thick specimen show degraded reso­
lution. If the desired resolution is specified then a STEM image of a crystalline 
specimen will be in no way superior to a CTEM image. For imaging purposes 
the TEM has therefore regained the ascendancy , since it offers a more useful 
combination of imaging and diffraction. The major current use of the so-called 
'dedicated' STEM (sometimes called the FEGSTEM) is as a multi-signal ana­
lytical microscope. Details of the technique are given in Keysc ef al. (1998). 
Since the field emission gun requires a very high vacuum (about 10-11 mbar 
or 10-9 Pa), dedicated STEM microscopes are generally designed with an ultra 
high vacuum (UHV) specimen chamber. Since a STEM needs no objective or 
projector lenses after the specimen (Figure 7.7) there is usually a large space 
available for a variety of signal detectors. It is not unusual to find an energy 
loss spectrometer. an annular dark field detector and an X-ray detector 
mounted ncar the specimen. The annular dark field detector enables a signal 
to be collected from electrons scattered in any direction through more than a 
specified angle. This gives a much bigger signal than docs conventional dark 
field imaging (section 4.2.2) and is particularly useful for amorphous 
specimens. The annular dark field image from a crystalline specimen would 
zzzPsgiolePfrp224 Electron microscopy and analysis 
obviously be created from more than one diffracted beam and is therefore not 
simple to interpret. 
Since the specimen is in an UHV environment it should not suffer contami­
nation during examination and therefore long counting times can often be 
used. The ability of a dedicated STEM to count for long times on very small 
areas, using a high brightness beam, gives it the best spatial resolution for 
analysis in the EM family. Useful analytical information has been obtained 
from regions as small as O'S nm diameter. At this level the stability of the 
specimen is absolutely crucial. In order to collect a meaningful analysis from 
a region of diameter O'S nm neither the beam nor the specimen must drift by 
more than about 0·1 nm during the collection period. Since the signal is bound 
to be small from such a small volume we might like to collect for several 
hundred seconds. This imposes a constraint even more severe than that for . . lmaglllg. 
The STEM is particularly well suited to the 'Z-contrast' technique described 
in section 4.2.1, which gives compositional information at high resolution from 
an imaging technique. 
Dedicated STEM instruments are now rarely manufactured, because they 
are expensive and the increasing capabilities of 'conventional' TEMs with field 
emission electron guns ('FEGTEMs ') mean that they can deliver most of the 
requirements for high resolution analysis. However a new generation of 'super­
STEM' instruments which incorporate aberration correction and deliver even 
better analytical resolution may be developed early in the new century. 
fleet ron holography 
Dennis Gabor invented holography in 1948 in order to improve the resolution 
of the EM. However electron holograms proved too difficult to produce and the 
first practical demonstration of the principle had to await the development of 
the laser. Recently further efforts have been made to harness the technique for 
its original purpose. I n a manner exactly analogous to conventional laser holog­
raphy, two coherent electron beams, one from the specimen and one acting as a 
reference beam, can be combined to form a hologram. The technique can only 
be made to work if the microscope is very stable and if the electron beam, from 
a field emission source, is very coherent. This places considerable constraints on 
the microscope and it is only with tremendous skill and patience that useful 
holograms can be produced. Several laboratories in the world have now 
succeeded in this task and interesting results are being produced, mainly on 
the distribution of magnetic and electric fields in materials. 
Imaging techniques compared 
It is useful to compare the various imaging techniques in terms of their ability 
to resolve detail laterally (i.e. in the plane of the specimen) and simultaneously 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 225 
1m 
Dt:plh 
/ " .-, 
" 
Imm ~. F.Je 
( 
I 
LM 
TDI , 
" Slil\l 
lnm 
SI'_\-l 
I"", lmm 1m 
Lateral resolution 
Figure 7.8 A map indicating the range of possible resolutions and the depth from which the 
image can be collected for the techniques discussed in the text. Notice that many 
techniques appear to have overlapping capabilities. particularly in the 1000IOOnm 
resolution range. However. each technique does not necessarily image the same 
part of the specimen. For example SEM and TEM largely overlap but one is a surface 
technique while the other can image internal struaure. 
in the third direction (usually thought of as depth). We have done this in Figure 
7.8 by plotting ·lateral resolution ' against ·depth'. The fields shown for the 
techniques overlap considerably , as we might expect. Note that 'depth' is not 
always exactly equivalent to the depth of field defined in Chapter I. For 
instance the limit to the depth information accessible to a TEM is not set by 
the notional depth of field but by the thickness of specimen which can be 
penetrated. In order to present the capabilities of such a wide range of instru­
ments on a single diagram both scales are logarithmic, so each technique spans 
several orders of magnitude. 
7.2 Complementary analysis techniqu es -alternativ e 
analysis systems 
Very few microscopic analysis techniques are currently in widespread use. A 
few years ago it would have been possible to say that only the excitation of 
characteristic X-rays by high energy electrons had been substantially exploited. 
The statement is less true now but there still remains a huge potential for new 
alternative methods of analysis. This can be illustrated if we consider the nature 
of most physical analysis tcchniques -a primary probing beam (chosen from 
ten or more possibilities) is used to excite up to ten secondary effects locally 
zzzPsgiolePfrp226 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Table 7.1 Some of the possible imaging and analysis techniques. 
Primary prabe Secondary effect Variable Technique 
EELS Electron Electron Energy - -
X-ray X-ray Temperature -XPS -
100 100 Mm SIMS 
Light Light Intensity SEM 
Neutron Neutron lime -SAM 
Sound Sound Angle 
Atom Heat Phase 
from the region of interest-the chosen secondary effects arc then monitored as 
a function of one or more of seven or eight variables. At the crudest level we 
can combine these figures to arrive at the possibility of 10 x 10 x 7 =700 single­
signal techniques, of which EM imaging, diffraction and X-ray analysis arc 
only three. Of course there are many more possibilities for multi-signal tech­
niques: more than a hundred of the single-signal techniques have been tried, 
but very few multi-signal techniques arc yet in widespread use. Table 7.1 shows 
just a few of the possibilities. For most microscopic techniques we are inter­
ested in the variation of the detected variable as a function of position on the 
specimen, but this is not always the case. There is only space in this chapter to 
mention a few of the more popular techniques which currently complement 
electron microscope-based analysis. 
7.2.1 Atom probe ~eld ion microscope (APFIM) 
One of the most sensitive analysis techniques yet invented has been developed 
from the field ion microscope. If a high potential or a short laser pulse is 
applied briefly to an FIM tip (i.e. the pointed specimen) a layer of atoms 
can be stripped from the surface. These will be ionized and will then accelerate 
towards the imaging screen (Figure 7.5(a)). In order to analyse a selected atom 
it is only necessary to orientate the specimen so that the image of the selected 
atom falls over a hole in the fluorescent screen, leading to a time-of-flight mass 
spectrometer. A sequence of single atoms can then be analysed by applying a 
series of high voltage pulses to the tip. Although the statistics of analysis in the 
atom probe arc inevitably poor, and the technique is essentially destructive, the 
spatial resolution could scarcely be bCllered. The APFIM technique has been 
used to great effect in materials science, as the example shown in Figure 7.9 
illustrates. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp"'I,io 
C 51" 
,.u 
'ol 
Gz ,.,..,.. Pri ..... 
,bl Electron microscopy and other techniques 227 
Ti ,+ 
I 
c," eo" , 
,.u 
Figure 7.9 Atom probe spectra from a superalloy. Each spectrum shows the number of ions 
detected with each atomic mass (plotted as atomic mass units, AMU). Spectrum 
(a) shows that the matrix contains Ni. Co, AI and Ti; spectrum (b) was collected 
from a small gamma prime particle and it can be seen that it is significantly depleted 
in chromium. (G. D. W. Smith. University of Oxford) 
During the 1990s the atom probe was developed into a truly three-dimen­
sional analytical technique by the incorporation of position sensitive detectors 
which enable the detection and analysis of ions leaving any region of the tip, 
rather than just those at one location. With such a PoSAP (Position Sensitive 
zzzPsgiolePfrp228 Electron microscopy and analysis 
Atom Probe) and its associated computer processing facilities 3D elemental 
maps of small regions a few tens of nm across can be displayed. This is still a 
very small part of any specimen, but bear in mind that a region just 20 nm in 
each direction contains about a million atoms, which will have been analysed 
one by one by a PoSAP instrument. 
7.2.2 STM spectroscopy 
The scanning tunnelling microscope can be used not only simply to map the 
topography of a sample surface but also to investigate the electronic energy 
levels at any point on that surface. In the best circumstances, therefore , the 
nature and state of a single atom can be investigated. This type of spectroscopy 
is done by varying the potential between the STM tip and the specimen. Figure 
7.10 shows, very schematically, how this affects the tunnelling processes and 
therefore the information which can be gleaned. The atom at the specimen 
surface will have a density of states similar to that shown in the diagram. 
Some of these states (those with energies below the Fermi energy, Ed will be 
filled with electrons while others, with energies greater than Er, will be 
empty. With no potential applied betwcen tip and surface (Figure 7.10(a», 
no tunnelling current will oeeur. If the specimen is biased positive (Figure 
7.10(b» then electrons can tunnel from the tip into empty states in the 
specimen. As the bias is varied the tunnelling current will change, telling us 
about the local density of unfilled states. If the specimen is biased negative 
(Figure 7.10(c» then electrons can tunnel from filled states in the specimen to 
empty states in the tip. As we vary the negative bias we therefore learn about 
the filled electron states of the specimen. As this over-simplified discussion 
reveals, STM spectroscopy has the potential for extremely detailed and 
extremely localized analysis. 
-- - --- ---" 
£ cf --
, E "----
, ~ E,,--
< ~ 
"P Speclmc " Tip . 
(,) (b) «) 
Figure 7./0 Tunnelling possibilities in an STM with (0) no bias. (b) positive bias and (c) negative 
bias. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 229 
7.2.3 SIMS 
lon-based surface analytical techniques are popular because of their sensitivity 
and their ability, in some cases, to reveal the variation of composition with 
depth beneath the original specimen surface (the depth profile). In particular, 
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) is extremely useful. In this technique 
a beam of primary ions, which can be focused down to a diameter of about 
20 nm and can be scanned, is used to eject secondary ions from the specimen. 
The mass (or strictly charge to mass ratio) of each secondary ion is deter­
mined by a mass spectrometer. The technique is clearly 'destructive ' in that the 
layer of atoms being analysed is removed from the specimen. However, at low 
primary ion beam currents this occurs very slowly and the technique is known 
at 'static SIMS'. In favourable cases as lillie as 0·1% of a monolayer of 
material can be detected. If higher primary ion beam currents are used, 
material is removed more rapidly and depth profiling can be achieved since 
each successive layer of atoms can be analysed as it is 'peeled away'. This is 
known as 'dynamic SIMS'. Modern SIMS equipment is capable of a spatial 
resolution beller than I ~lm and therefore composition maps can be displayed, 
which appear similar to the X-ray maps shown in Figures 6.10 and 6.11. This is 
often called 'imaging SIMS'. All SIMS techniques enjoy two great advantages. 
The first is element range: since a mass spectrometer is sensitive to all elements 
(strictly all isotopes) even the 'difficult' light elements from hydrogen to oxygen 
ean be analysed and mapped. The second advantage is sensitivity: SIMS is 
usually able to detect concentrations in the ppm (parts per million) range 
and in good circumstances can be scnsitive to parts per billion (ppb). 
Remember that I ppm is 0,0001%. 
7.2.4 RBS: Ion beam analysis 
Most of the techniques which have been developed for use with scanned 
electron beams can be earried out using ions or protons. Ions generally 
penetrate the specimen much less deeply than electrons of equivalent energy, 
so they are more surface-sensitive. High energy ions excite secondary electrons 
and characteristic X-rays as well as secondary ions, so ion-based analogues of 
the SEM and microprobe analyser have been developed. In general the peak­
to-background ratio for secondary effects excited by ions is larger than that for 
electron excitation so the sensitivity (i.e. the minimum detection limit) of ion­
based techniques is beller. On the other hand the spatial resolution of ion 
probes is generally worse than that of electron probes. A further range of 
techniques based on the scallering of high energy ions is becoming more 
widely uscd. The prime example is Rutherford Backscallering (RBS), in 
which helium ions (alpha particles) of 2 or 3 MeV are directed at thc 
specimen. A fraction of the primary ions interact strongly with the nucleus 
of a specimen atom and they are deflected through more than 90 degrees. The 
zzzPsgiolePfrp230 Electron microscopy and analysis 
50 
polystyrene ~ I~ 
~ 
5i 
Energy 
Figure 7.11 An RBS spectrum resulting from the scattering of a beam of I -5 MeV helium ions 
from a silicon specimen on which has been deposited 200nm of polystyrene and 
5 nm ci tin. The peak positions indicate the atomic number of the species, with 
heavier atoms giving smaller energy losses and appearing on the right of the 
spectrum. (R. S. Payne University of Surrey) 
energy spectrum of thcse backscattercd ions (e.g. Figure 7.11) can rcvcal a 
great dcal about thc nature of thc specimcn. Backscattercd ions losc a wcll­
dcfined amount of cncrgy in their Rutherford collision, and also lose more by 
electronic interactions during their passage through the spccimen. A spectrum 
such as Figure 7.11 thereforc enablcs us to dcduce not only thc nature of 
the atoms in thc specimcn but also their dcpth distribution. Since the 
specimen is largely undamaged by MeV alpha particles this can bc achieved 
non-destructi vel y. 
In favourable circumstances RBS can determine depth distributions to a 
resolution of 10nm and can detect p.p.m. amounts of imp uri tics. If the 
specimen is a singlc crystal, as semiconductors often are, then it can be set at 
such an orientation to the particle beam that the ions arc 'channelled' along 
particular crystallographic directions. In this condition the RBS techniquc is 
even morc sensitive to imperfections which locally modify the crystallinity, or 
to interstitial impurity atoms which are not on normal lattice sites. 
7.2.5 Auger microscopy and spectroscopy 
Thc emission of characteristic (Auger) electrons was described in section 2.8.3. 
Thc energies of the most useful Auger elcctrons arc generally fairly low (a few 
keY) and they can bc determined using an electron spectrometer of different 
design from the energy loss spectrometer describcd in section 6.6. The two most 
popular spectrometcrs are of the serial type and focus electrons of the selccted 
energy electrostatically using either a cylindrical 'mirror' or a pair of hemi­
spheres. If onc of thcsc spectrometers is mounted on a scanning electron micro-
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 231 
scope it should be possible to perform scanning Auger microscopy (SAM) and 
to create compositionally mapped images. 
Despite the fact that the yield of Auger electrons can be quite high, especially 
from light clements (see section 2.8.3), most of them will be re-absorbed within 
a solid specimen and will not escape. High electron beam currents are therefore 
needed to generate a useful Auger signal and this means that the primary beam 
spot size must be quite large (see section 5.5.1). The resolution of Auger maps 
is therefore limited to about 50 nm. Nonetheless the SAM technique is a very 
powerful tool in the surface analyst's armoury. It would appear to be attractive 
to detect the Auger signal from the specimen in a TEM. However there are a 
number of practical problems. The space around the specimen is very restricted 
in a TEM and it is difficult to mount an Auger electron spectrometer in such a 
way that it can collect an appreciable fraction of the electrons emitted. The 
generated signal is, in any case, small since the majority of electrons in a TEM 
do not excite an inner-shell electron (see section 2.7.4). For these reasons only a 
very small number of laboratories in the world have yet sueceeded in perform­
ing Auger analysis in a TEM. 
7.2.6 Surface analysis by XPS 
The surface analysis technique of scanning Auger microscopy has already been 
described in section 7.2.5. There are several other well established 
complementary techniques dedicated to the analysis of surfaces. 
Monochromatic X-rays or ultraviolet light are often used to excite photo­
electrons whose energy carries information about the binding energy within 
their original atom, and thus about the nature of the atoms in the specimen. 
The characteristic kinetic energy of the photo-electron is given by the energy of 
the X-ray (or ultraviolet) photon, which is totally absorbed in the process, 
minus the characteristic binding energy of the electron which is emitted. 
These photo-electron spectroscopy techniques are called XPS and UPS or 
more loosely ESCA (Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis). Since 
photo-electrons can only escape from near the specimen surface the chemical 
information which they carry is specific to the top few atomic layers. Photo­
electron energies are also sensitive to the state of bonding of the atom from 
which they come, so for instance metallic iron can be distinguished from iron in 
an oxide. XPS is well suited to determining composition and bonding state in 
thin layers near the specimen surface but it does not offer good spatial resolu­
tion because the exciting beam of X-rays covers a wide area and cannot readily 
be focused. 
7.2.7 Raman spectroscopy 
Raman scattering involves the inelastic scattering of light. Light scattered from 
a specimen shows either a shift to longer wavelengths (the Stokes shift, corre-
zzzPsgiolePfrp232 Electron microscopy and analysis 
sponding to energy loss) or a shift to shorter wavelengths (the anti-Stokes shift, 
corresponding to energy gain). The spectrum of reflected light, containing 
various Stokes and anti-Stokes lines, acts as a fingerprint for the chemical 
species on the specimen surface. Raman spectroscopy is thus a sensitive analy­
tical techniq ue, which can give information not just about elemental species but 
also about their bonding states. It is often carried out via a spectrometer 
attached to a light microscope , which is of course a well devcloped and con­
venient way of delivering light to and from the specimen. Increasingly Raman 
spectroscopy is being done with a confocal microscope (see section 7.1.1), 
making it quite easy both to identify the region of interest and to perform 
scanning to produce chemical maps. 
7.2.B Developments in EM 
No totally new EM analysis techniques have been developed in the last ten 
years. However we can expect that both EDX and EELS techniques will 
continue to develop and that the Z-contrast STEM technique (see section 
4.2.1) will become more widely used. 
7.2.9 Analysis techniques compared 
A graphical comparison of several analytical techniques is shown in 
Figure 7.12. This is a similar style of presentation to the imaging comparison 
in Figure 7.8 but instead of plotting image depth we now plot the depth (from 
the surface) from which the analytical information comes. The conclusion to be 
drawn is similar to that drawn from the earlier comparison. No one technique 
Depth 
I nrn EPMA 
r---
SIMS XPS 
STI\I 
Imn 11--lm lmm 
Lateral resolution 
Figure 7. / 2 A map showing the spatial origin of the analytical information for many of the tech­
niques discussed in the text. Notice that there may be significant extra differences 
between techniques in terms of their element range and sensitivity. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 233 
can solve all problems -many approaches are needed. That message has, we 
hope, come across elearly in the whole book. 
7.3 Complementary diffraction techniques 
There arc many well established and widely used X-ray diffraction techniques 
which are complementary to the electron diffraction methods outlined here. 
Dctails of them arc beyond the scope of this book. Neutron diffraction also 
retains a niche role for materials scientists. 
7.3.1 RHHD and LEED 
A discussion of electron diffraction would not be complete without mention of 
RHEED (Reflection High Energy Electron Diffraction) and LEED (Low 
Energy ED). Both these techniques arc used to reduce the depth below the 
surface from which the diffraction information is collected. In RHEED this is 
achieved by directing the primary beam at a glancing angle of incidence to the 
specimen. Its penetration below the surface is therefore low, as Figure 7.13 
shows. 
The LEED approach is different in that the primary beam is usually incident 
perpendicular to the specimen surface but very low energies are used to reduce 
penetration. Extremely detailed surface structural information can be deduced 
.. . .. .. : ........ : i:i"i.:··· 
.' ........ '/"':/.: 
.. :::::::,r:: .i;.··.'i.' · ... ·,i·:···: 
r----- --1I---- -~___, ~ -----------.. ....i·· 'i··:'i' ii .. · .. · .... i ......... · ·i.:'· .. ::/,.;:[.:.' ...... :... : ..... : .... /' i .. ·.:i ........ ,.. ' .. .. . .... .., : .. : ..... · .. i.· .................. ' ..... . ...... . ... ,.'i· .. ,··· .. ·,· .. i:·i .. ...-....... '.' .... i': ............. . .. '.' .... , ... .. . . : .. . . ,.. "·i /i"'i ..... . ... " . i:i ........ ,.. .,' ., ........... : ... , ........ . , ..... : ...... ,.. .. ..... , ... . .. .. , .. : .. . .............. ,.............. .... .. .: ...... " ....... .. ,.," ....... : .... ,.,.... , ............ . ...... .. .. , ..... .'., '. , ....... : .. 
.... 'i .......... "'" .... , ......... ... d .'. " ........ ·"i.·: ... ' .... , ·i/.":'" ": ,",' ... i .... ·... . ... : .. '/· .. ·: ... / ..... :.·ii··.' ..... , .... '.' ....... ,.: .......... : ... : ...... ,'. . . .. ' .... ... .. . .. .. ··'i"· .",' '. ,.' .... , .... '.: .... ; ... : ..... ,.," ..... ,.: ....... '., .. ", i'" .. '.' .. " .. ' '.;': .. ' ".' ·i·,' .... ....... .".·ii".:· .'. '.' 'i.'i .. ·i/· .. ,:'" ....... . ...... . ....... , . .. ". .... ,. 
i .. ·· ... · ... /.·· .. ·ii .... r··,/. 1t" .. _i.:"~_;_ ... ,~~·. ",_ .. ·.~i:. __ "" -- - - - -_.: ... ,,: .... :;.i.i:·: .••...... 
(a) (b) i::" " ..... , .. . .... ...: ............... ; ........... . 
..... .,., ............ ; .. -. ··i 
., ......... ;· .. ..'i .. ··:i": : '. ". . i':.'" :i',i ..... / ... . 
. . . " .' . : ...... : . : . '. ,..... . 
........ ;.: i:",/ .. ' .. 
. . ... : ..... ,' : .. ' ..... 
.. "I 
Figure 7.13 Electron dtffraction from a crystalline specimen (a) in transmission and (b) in 
reflection. The effeaive thickness of material from which the diffraction informa· 
tion is collected, d. is much reduced by using a refleaion technique. 
zzzPsgiolePfrp234 Electron microscopy and analysis 
from LEED patterns, although interpretation is not very easy. The highest 
resolution surfaee imaging techniques (REM, SREM, surface profiling and 
STM, see above and below) arc now challenging LEED as the most convenient 
way to pinpoint atomic positions on surfaces. 
7.3.2 Development s in £M diffraction 
One area in which we can expect further development is the energy filtering of 
diffraction patterns in the electron microscope. We have discussed in section 
6.6.4 the increasing usc of energy filtering microscopes to produce images 
resulting from particular energy losses and thus particular elements. Energy 
filtered diffraction patterns are also very useful, because it is possible to remove 
inelastically scattered electrons (since these have by definition lost some 
energy). The resultant diffraction patterns contain only elastically scattered 
electrons and much fine detail, normally lost within the inelastic background, 
can be recovered. 
7.4 Summary 
We have shown how many variations of electron microscopy there are, and 
how many other techniques arc available. We should never assume that any of 
these is the 'ultimate technique ': existing techniques will continue to be refined 
and extended; new techniques will continue to be devised (such as, in our 
working lives, STM, AFM and confocal microscopy), and perhaps most 
significant of all we will improve our ability to extract (and interpret) two or 
more signals from our specimens. What all these advances have in common is 
that they will be made by people who understand the physical principles of 
imaging and analysis, and these are what we have tried to impart throughout 
this book. We hope that we have, at least partially, sueceeded. 
7.5 Questions 
I List three techniques which use serial image collection and three which use 
parallel image collection. Into which category would you put field Ion 
microscopy? 
2 If a I em cylinder of piezoelectric material is to be used to move a specimen by 
up to IOllm to provide the scanning for an STM, what is the maximum strain 
which needs to Ix: induced in the material? 
3 The PoSAP provides a very sensitive analysis in that individual atoms of a 
particular element can Ix: counted. The detection of a single atom in 106 
would appear to offer a sensitivity of 0·0001% (I ppm). Why would you not 
zzzPsgiolePfrpElectron microscopy and other techniques 235 
usc the PoSAP to determine thc carbon content of a steel or the iron content 
of an aluminium alloy to ±O·OOOI %? 
4 ·Static' SIMS can Ix: uSLxi to detect and analyse as little as a tenth of a 
monolayer of a solid surface. If the analysed area is I mm x I mm estimate the 
number of atoms which would Ix: involved in such an analysis. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpFurther reading 
SEM 
Goldstein, J. I .. Newbury. D. E., Echlin. P., Joy. D. c., Fiori, C. and Lifshin, E. (1981) 
Scallning Electro/l Microscopi' and X-ray Allalpi.I", New York: Plenum Press. 
Joy. D. C. (1984) 'Be<lm interactions, contrast and resolution in the SEM', J. Micros­
copy 136: 241. 
Chescoe, D. and Goodhew. P. 1. (1990) 'The operation of transmission and sC<lnning 
microscopes', Roya! Microscopical Society Ham/hook 20. Oxford: BIOS. 
Rich.uds. B. P. <lnd Foolner. P. K. (1992) 'The role of microscopy in semicond uctor 
failure <In<llysis', Roya! Microscopical Socidy Ham/hook 25. Oxford: BIOS. 
Reimer. L (1998) Scanning Elec/roll Microscopy. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
TEM 
Wi!!i<lms. D. B. and Carler. C. B. (1996) Transmission £ICC/roll Microscopy: A Texthook 
for Materials Science. New York: Plenum Press. 
Chescoe. D. and Goodhew. P. 1. (1990) 'The operation of transmission and sC<Jnning 
microscopes'. Royal Microscopical Society Handhook 20. Oxford: BIOS. 
Goodhew. 1'.1. (1985) ·Thin foil prep<Jr<Jtion fore1ectron microscopy'. in A. M. Glauert 
(ed.) Practical Methods ill Electron Microscopy. VoL II. Amsterd<Jm: Elsevier. 
Keysc. R. 1.. G;mall-Reed. A. 1.. Goodhew. P. 1. <Jnd Lorimer, G. W. (1998) 
IlIIrodl/ction 10 Scanllillg Transmission Electroll Microscopy. Oxford: BIOS. 
Reimer. L. (1995) Energy-jiltcrillg Trallsmi.l·sioll Eleetron Microscopy. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Tonomur<l. A. (1993) Electroll Holography. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Maunsb<Jch. A. Afzelius, B. <Jnd Afzelius, B. (1998) Biomedical Electron Microscopy: 
IIIllstrated Me/hods and IlIIcrpre/mioll.\·. London: AC<Jdemic Press. 
TEM and diffraction 
Hammond, C. (1997) The Basics of Crys/allography alld Diffractioll. Oxford: Oxford 
Science Public<ltions. 
Bristol EM Group (1985) Conl'crgl'1II Beam Diffractioll of Alloy Phases. Bristol: Adam 
Hilger. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpFurther reading 237 
Edington, J. W. (1975) "Electron dim·action'. Practical Electroll Microscopy. Vol. 2. 
London: M<lcmilhm. 
Hirsch. P. B., Howie. A., Nicholson, R. B .. P<lshley. D. W. <lnd Whebn. M. J. (1965) 
Electroll Microscopy of Thill Crystal.I·. London: Butterworth. 
Loretto. M. H. (1984) Eleclroll 8calll Allalysis of Mmcrials. London: Ch<lpman & H<lll. 
Thom<ls, G. and Goringe. M. J. (1979) Trallsllli.l"SiOIl Eleclroll Microscopy of Mmerials. 
F<lirf<lx: Tech Books. 
Analysis 
Egerton. R. F. (1996) Eleclron Energy Loss S[Jl'clroscopy ill Ihe Eleclroll Microscope. 
2nd edn. New York: Plenum Press. 
Hren. J. L Goldstein. J. J. and Joy, D. C. (1979) IlIIrodl/clion {() Analytical Electroll 
Micro.\·copy. New York: Plenum Press. 
Recd, S. J. B. (1993) Eleclron Microprobe Analysis, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
SCOII. v. D. <lnd Love. G. (1983) QI/alllitmil"e Eleclron-probe Microallalysi.\·. Chichester: 
EHis Horwood. 
Other microscopies 
Ame1inckx, S., V<ln Dyck, D .. van Landuyt. J. and van Tenderloo. G. (cds) (1997) 
Halldbook of Microscopy. Weinheim: VCH. 
Sheppard. C. J. R. and Shollon, D. M. (1997) 'Confoc<ll1aser scanning microscopy', 
Royal Micro.Kopical SocielY Handbook 311. Oxford: BIOS. 
Br<ldbury. S. <lnd Bracegirdle. B. (1998) 'Introduction to light microscopy', Royal 
MicrOJcopical Society Halldbook 42. Oxford: BIOS. 
Matter Software 
All the software referred to m this book is to be found in the MATTER 
modules contained in Materials Science all CD-ROM, Liverpool University 
Press or Chapman & Hall (1998). For details of upgrades and later releases 
see www.liv.ac.ukj..-.matterjhome.html or www.matte r.org.uk 
zzzPsgiolePfrpAnswers 
Chapter I 
I Equation l.l gives 2 mm 
2 AI infinity 
3 6 
4 Equation 1.4 gives r = 709 nm 
5 Equations 1.1 and 1.2 give 40cm from lens, magnification =4 
6 tan ex = O· 5/20 then from figure 1.11 II = djtan r:x = 40 ~lm. Depth of focus = 
10000 greater = 40 em 
72,3,4 
8 Length c.g. mm 
For EM equation 1.9 wilh ]00 kV electrons gives 953 nm, almost 1 ~lm. 
For light assuming O·51lm wavelength gives O·23Ilm. 
9 Because after passing through the specimen some electrons muSI have lost 
energy, thereby changing their wavelength and contributing 10 a spread of 
wavelengths in the Ix:ams which pass through the objcctive and projcctor 
lenses 
Chapter 2 
I Equation jusl above 2.5 gives} = 5 x \07 Am-2 or 5 x ]03 Acm-2. This is 
3·1 x \08 electrons nm-2 S-I 
2 W is close 10 O· 5 for Z = 32 (Germanium) 
3 Equation 2.3 gives 5·3 x 10-31 kg (almost a 60% incrcasc) 
4 Auger energy should Ix: smaller, Ix:cause the departing electron has to 
overcome (i.e. lose) its binding energy 
5 P(O) = 0·358; p(3) = 0·093 so 64·2% are not scattered while 9·3% arc 
scatterLxi three times. 
6 99·4% 
7 3.31 x 10-33 m 
8 IS22s22p63s23p63d lO4s1 
zzzPsgiolePfrpAnswers 239 
9 From equation 2.11 wavelength = 0·61 nm; could Ix: P(K,,), Zr(L,,) or 
possibly Pt(M,,) 
\0 Advantages: vibrational stability, room at top for aecess to viewing chamlx:r 
(image detector EELS, etc). Disadvantage: harder to access gun 
Chapter 3 
I 
('1 
'" '" 
, 
01-'-" 
(hI 
• 
• • 
• • 
• 
• • 
• 
CBE = ,_ • • 
• 
0 • • • 
• 
• 0 • '" '" 
• 
• • • • • , • • 0 • • • • • • • , • • 
• • • 
eBE .. 2A. CBE = 3" 
2 First order, 9· 18 mrad (0.526°); second order 18·35 mrad (1.052°) • 
• 
• 
3 Spots OCcome eloser together; region of zero order u.lue zone expands; HOLZ 
rings increase in diameter 
4 Use equation 3.6 
Primitive cubic-100· 110· III· 200· 210 . , , , , 
Body centred cubic: I \0; 200; 211; 220; 3 \0 ------5 (a) 220; 220; 202; 202; 022; 022. 
(b) From equation 3.9 and Table 3.1, a = 0·4243nm 
6 (a) By inserting a selected area aperture over the grain in the image, usmg 
parallel illumination 
zzzPsgiolePfrp240 Answers 
(b) By focusing the eleetron beam down to a small probe using C2 and 
placing the beam on the grain using the beam deflectors 
7 An increase in diffuse intensity between spots; loss of detail in HOLZ lines in 
CBED pallerns 
8 From section 3.4.1, 0·22mrad (0·0124°) 
9 In selected area dilTraction, the HOLZ rings are made up of spots, whilst in 
wnvergent Ix:am dilTraction they are made up of line segments. 
10 
e 
L 
, 
(a) From the figure, AOD and OBC are similar triangles . 
. 0 g/2 '/d .. ~ Sill = -= -. glvlllg g = -1/1. g' Ad 
Bragg's law can then Ix: re-wrillen 
. I.g (): 
sIll0=2= Vu 
Squaring both sides of this equation gives A = 2(1 sin 2 O. 
(b) Ignoring the elTects of lens distortions, the length measured on the screen, 
r, is given by L tan 0, where L is the camera length. 
Since sin 0 = V 2~' by constructing the triangle above we find that 
tano=V2dA
A 
and so the radius of the ring is 
r=LV2dA 
A' 
zzzPsgiolePfrpAnswers 241 
Chapter 4 
I Underfocus (smallest convergcnL\: angle), III focus, overfocus (largest con­
vergence angle) 
2 12·5mrad 
3 Decreasing the focal length of CI increases the convergence angle and 
demagnification of the electron souree, i.e. it decreases the spot size at the 
speLimen. If C2 is not adjusted, it also increases the convergence at the 
speLlmen 
4 From equation 3.4, the Bragg angle of the 002 ocam is 10·28 mrad. For a 
parallel beam of electrons, this diffracted ocam will oc 10·28 11m away from 
the unddlected ocam in the back focal plane, and would oc blocked by a 
5 20 ~lm aperture L"Cntred on the undeflected ocam. 
electrons, the aperture would have to oc smaller. 
100nm x lOOnm= 10-10 Lm2. 
6 (a) Just oclow the specimen entry port; For a convergent ocam of 
(b) about half way octwccn the slX"cimen and the screcn; 
(c) just Ix:low the electron gun. 
7 In bright field imaging, the undefleC\(:d beam is uSLxi 10 form an image. Thc 
image will oc bright in the absenL\: of a specimen. In dark field imaging, a 
dilTracted Ix:am is used to form the image and the background is dark in the 
absence of a specimen (sec also section 4.2.2 and Figure 4.12) 
8 The contour will move, sinL\: a dilTerent part of the specimen will satisfy the 
Bragg condition for these planL""S 
9 A dislOC1.lIion is invisible if g·b = 0, and a Slacking fault is invisible if 
g' R = II, II Ix:ing any integer. This gives: 
(a) dislOC1.lIions visible, stacking fault invisible; 
(b) dislOC1.lIions invisible, stacking fault visible; 
(c) both dislOC1.lIions and Slacking fault invisible 
10 Mass thickness contrast, dilTraction contrast, and phase contrast 
Chapter 5 
I Reference to Figure 5.11 and equation 5.2 shows that the prooc diameter (d) is 
reduced if the strength of the condenser lens is increased. In so doing, the 
angle tlo is increased and thus the ocam current as given by equation 5.3 is 
reduL'Cd. increasing the size of aperture (A) would increase Cl:1 and therefore 
the Ix:am current. However, this will increase the spherical aocrration 
(equation 5.10) and this will ultimately limit the smallest spot size obtainable 
2 The depth of field (II) at a particular magnification is determined by the 
working distance and objective aperture. From L-quation 5.8, it is found that 
an aperture no larger than 20llm is rcquirLxi 
3 The optimum operating conditions are when the Ix:am diameter (t/) is L-qual to 
the specimen pixel size (1') as given by equation 5.4 and therefore d should Ix: 
zzzPsgiolePfrp242 Answers 
increaS(:d as the magnification (M) is reduced. If d > I' a blurred image results 
and if d < I' then the Ix:am and hence the Ix:am current are unnccessarily 
small and a noisy image may result 
4 From equation 5.22 we find the backscallering coefficients (111 and 112) to Ix: 
0·0343 and 0·0257. The natural contrast (C) is then given by equation 5.23 as 
0·251 
5 The Ix:am current (I) is obtained from equation 5.20 as 2 x 10-11 A. dmin is 
obtained from equation 5.12 as 2·3nm. PUlling these values into equation 
5.13 gives the minimum usable prolx: diameter (t/) as 13·5 nm. For secondary 
elcctrons, this may Ix: taken as the spatial resolution 
Chapter 6 
I K for P 
L for Mo (K not efficiently generated) 
K for Cr (L not well detected) 
L or M for Os. 
2 Bc=IIO/3·8=28 
Zr=15770/3·8=4150 
Reasons include elTect of noise/statistics on low numlx:r of counts i.e. smaller 
signal, broader peak, also spacing of peaks which are closer at low Z 
3 (a) Ca 
(b) Ar 
Also Mg close to eseape peak for Ar. Mn close to sum peak for Ar 
4 d> )./2 for Bragg's Law to work, so Fe > 0·095 nm 
Ti> 1·37 nm > only get such big spacings from artificial (soapy) crystals. 
5 B = 61 nm so total diameter is 66 nm 
(a) smaller signal from particle at bollom than top (smaller proportion of 
electrons hit it) 
(b) lower spatial resolution of particles at bollom 
6 Equation 6.4 gives 1·6%,0·16% and 0·02% 
7 1'(1)/1'(0) =0·1 = tit., so r= 12nm 
Chapter 7 
I Series: from SEM, imaging SIMS, STM, AFM, confocal LM. Parallcl from: 
TEM, conventional LM, GIF image filter, magnifying glas.<; 
2 O· I % 
3 Inhomogeneity and sampling 
4 Surface atoms about 0·2nm square, so O·IML contains about 2x 1013 
atoms. Comment: so statistics of counting should Ix: good. 
zzzPsgiolePfrpIndex 
<Jberralions 8, 14-17.68,74.75,80 
<Jchrom<Jtic 14. 17 
chrom<ltic 14. 17 
diffraction 137 
spheric;]1 15. 18. 72, 74. 131. 132. 137 
<lbsorplion 32, 31 86, 174. 199.201. 202 
coefficients 199 
effect (A) 201. 202 
<lcceler<lting voltage 23. 108, 128. 129. 
164 
<lCCUfacy 202 
<Jchrom<Jtic <Jberralions 14. 17 
AFM 216.217-19 
<lirlock 71 
Airy's rings 10. II 
Airy disc 10 
<llignment 75-6 
<llpha particles 229 
<Jluminium 41. 43. 49.57,58, 102. 104. 
108, 119 
<lntorphous maleri<lls 40. 41. 78 
<lmplilude 
contrast 105 
of scattering 44. 54 
<In<lglyph 145 
<In<Jlogue SEM 124. 133, 161 
<In<llytical electron microscopy 38, 15. 
169-212 
<.Ingular distribution 40 
<lnnular d;uk field detector 223 
<Jpertures 8, 12. 17. 18.71. 74. 132. 133, 
135 
condenser 7. 67 
diffraction 74 numerical II. 135 
objective 12. 13. 17, 71, 76--8 I, 86, 106 
optimum 18 
APFIM 226 
astigm<.ltism 16,76 
atom columns 78, 107 
<.Itom im<Jging 217, 220, 222 
atomic force microscopy (AFM) 216, 217-
19 
atomic number 
contr<.lst 78, 100, 148 
effect (Z) 201-2 
scattering factor 30 
atom milling 114-16 
atom probe (APFIM) 226 
Auger electron 35, 37, 125 
emission 35 
microscopy 230 
spectroscopy 36, 230--1 
yield 37 
autobi<Js 25 
back foc<.ll plane 71, 72, 76 
background 199,209,211 
backsc<Jlter 32, 33, 34, 37, 126, 189, 196 
coe1licient 128, 141, 146 
detector 130 
im<Jges 132, 147, 150, 171 
sign<.ll 127 
barrel distortion 16 
beam 
current 138,201 
diameter 67, 195,222 
spre<.lding 194 
zzzPsgiolePfrp244 Index 
bery!!ium 183 
window 177. 180. 195 
bias 25 
binding energy 21 
biological material 204 
bit-map image 162 
boron 177, 183. 208 
Bragg 
angle 43. 54-7. 82. 85 
diffraction 41--4. 80.150 
Law 42. 45.53. 81. 82 
orientation 85 
Bremsstr<.lhlung 36. 170 
bright field image 76. 80-3. 90-4.100.101. 
103 
brightness 25 
bubbles 104 
buckled specimen 82. 83 
Burgers vector 96-101. 103. 105 
calibr<.ltion 98 
Cilmer<.l 66. 75 
constant 47. 48. 49. 52 
length 47. 48. 50. 71 
cantilever beam 218 
carbon films 119 
cathode ray tube (CRT) 122. 134 
cathodoluminescence 35. 156--158 
CilVity 103. 104 
CBED 61--4. 87. 88. 101 
channelling 149-50 
characteristic 
edges 207-8 
X-ray 35-7.170--4 
charge collection mode 153 
charging of s<.lmples 164. 166 
chemic<.ll polishing 111-13 
chromatic <.Iberration 14. 17 
Cliff-Lorimer technique 204 
coating 191 
coherency 42. 224 
collection 
angle 178. 182 
efliciency 181. 195 
collimator 67 
column approximation 88. 89 
columns of atoms 78. 107 complementary fringes 90 
compound lenses 14 
compositional 
contrast 104--6 
maps 186--90. 211 
condenser 
aperture 7 
lens 7. 67. 74. 133 
system 6 
conductio n band 22 
confoc<.ll microscopy 12. 215 
cont<.lmination 224 
contr<.lst 7. 189 
Atomic number (Z) 148 
atomic number 133 
channel1ing 149 
compositional 104-6 
diffraction 80-106 
mass-thickness 76--80. 101. 105 
natural 138 
phase 106--8 
topographic 141 
convergence angle 13. 67-9. 78 
convergent-beam diffraction (CBED) 
61--4.87.88. 101 
correction procedures 200--5 
Coulombic interaction 30 
count r<.lte 186. 189.200.205 
crossover 25 
cross-section 29. 32. 209 
cryst<.ll 
defects 88-101 
spectrome ter 181-3. 185 
structure 44. 61 
crystallographic analysis -SEM 149 
crystallographic orientation I 51 
dark current 24 
dark field im<.lge 79--83. 86. 87. 90--4. 100. 
102.223 
dead time 178 
de Broglie 23 
Debye-Scherrer pallern 49 
dedicated STEM 79. 80. 110. 222--4 
defect 88-101 
line 58 
point 219 
zzzPsgiolePfrpdefocus 107. 135 
density 76. 77. 101. 103 
depth of field 12. 18. 135. 225 
depth of focus 13. 75 
depth of X-r<Jy production 171-4 
depth profile 229 
detection limit 199-200. 229 
detector 174-81 
b<Jcksc<Jttered electron 130 
cathodoluminescence 156 
efficiency 178. 182.206--7 
Everhart-Thornley 129 
g<Js-phase 166 
multi-element 146 
Robinson 131 
scintilbtor 130 
second<Jryelectron 130 
solid state 130 
through-the-lens 131 
devi<Jtion parameter. s 54. 55. 83-8. 
92 
diamond 101 
diffraction 40--65. 149.233-4 
aperture 74 
conditions 71. 81. 105 
contrast 80--106 
effect 10. 17 
lens 71 
pattern 41. 45--52. 56--8. 60-4. 69. 71. 
73.74.8 1. 87.151-3 
rules 45 
vector 51. 88 
diffuse sC<Jttering 58 
digital 
SEM 124. 134. 159. 162 
X-ray m<Jpping 187-90 
disc of least confusion 15 
displacement 88 
d<Jmage 109 
f<Jull 89-104 
field of dislocation 94 
of <JlOms 109 
threshold 109 
vector 88 
distortion 5 
barrel 16 
pincushion 16 
dot maps 187-8 drift 224 
d-sp<Jcing 42. 46. 49 
dynamical theory 85-9 
dynamic SIMS 229 
EBIC. EBIV 153 
EBSD 151-3 
edge dislocation 96. 98. 107 
edge (EELS) 208 Index 245 
EDS 175-81. 184. 186. 189. 194.211 
EELS 27. 38. 205-12 
m<Jpping 211 
effective devi<Jtion parameter 76. 88. 104 
efficiency. detector 178. 182.206--7 
elastic scattering 30. 40. 42. 76. 78 
electromagnetic lens 27. 66--74. 132 
electron 20--35 
Auger 36 
backsc<Jttered 32. 125. 128 
backsc<Jtter diffr<Jction pattern (EBSD) 
151-3 
beam 53 
beam induced current (EBIC) 153 
beam induced voltage (EBIV) 153 
channelling 149 
conduction b<Jnd 22 
deflection 27. 29 
diffraction 40-65. 233-4 
energy levels 21 
energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) 27. 
38. 75. 205-12 
free 22 
gun 23--27. 38. 66. 122. 141. 184 
hologr<Jphy 224 
inner shell 32. 35 
localized 20 
outer 22 
particle 17 
prim<Jry 27 
scattering 29-33 
secondary 31. 34. 37. 125. 127-29 
shells 21 
spectroscopy 231 
states 22 
velocity 22 
wave 17 
electron-hole pair 130. 153. 176 
zzzPsgiolePfrp246 Index 
electron probe microanalysis 36. 38. 
184-93 
electropolishing 111-11 196 
electrost<ltic lens 27 
element<ll mapping 211 
ELNES 210 
embedding 118 
emission 25 
empty m<lgnific<ltion 8 
energy 
hands 22 
binding 21 
fdtering 212. 234 
levels 2\. 35 
loss 206 
selection 212 
window 209 
energy dispersive X-r<ly 
<In<llysis 149. 175-81 
detector (EDS) 175. 180. 184 
energy filtered im<lging 212 
energy loss spectrometry 27. 38. 205-12 
environmental SEM (ESEM) 166 
ESCA 231 
escape pe<lk 180 
eucentric height 71 
Everhart -Thornley detector 129 
Ewald sphere 52-4. 62. 63 
excess line 58 
exclusion principle 21 
EXELFS 211 
extinction 
contour 82. 81 84-101 
dist<lnce 54. 80. 83-7 
extraction replic<l 119 
f<lmily of microscopes 38 
FEGSEM 141. 150. 151 
FEGSTEM 223 
Fermi energy 28 
field emission 26 
gun (F£G) 26. 67. 14\. ISO. 196.222 
field ion microscope 3. 219--22 
filament 24. 25 
FIM 3.219-22 
fine structure 210. 211 
fluorescence 17\. 174. 196.201-3.215 
yield 37 fluorescent screen 66. 72 
focal length 4. 14. 78 
focusing 14-16 
foils 112 
forbidden reflections 44 
forw<lrd-peaked sc<lttering 30. 33 
Fowler-Nordheim equation 26 
fracture surface 135, 141 151 
framestore 134. 139, 151. 162 
frame time 139. 140, 161 
free electrons 22 
Fresnel fringes 103 
fringes 
complementary 90. 92 
Fresnel 101 
lattice 107 
moire 93. 94. 95 
thickness 84-6. 92 
gallium arsenide 1(1(). 107 
gamma control 161 
gas proportional counter 181 
geometrical optics 76 
geometry 
of electron diffraction 40--4 
GIF 212 
gold41,49 
Goldstein equation 205 
GP zones 57 
grain boundary 92-4 
grey level 4 
grids 112 
gun 23-27, 38, 66. 184 
g-vector 51. 53. 8\. 85-106 
heating 31 
helium 208 
bubbles 104 
Helmholtz 4 
high order L<lue zones (HOLZ) 62, 63 
high volt<lge electron microscope 
(HVEM) 67. 108-10 
hologr<lphy 224 
HOLZ 
lines 64 
rings 62, 63 
Howie-Whel<ln equations 86, 88. 98 
zzzPsgiolePfrpiHumin<.ttion 6. 7, 66, 67 
Image 
formation 2 
rotation 28 
width 89, 104, 105-6 
indexing 49-50 
inelastic scanering 30--3, 40. 58, 76, 78. 86, 
125. 126 
inner shell 
electrons 32. 35 
excitation 32, 209 
intensity 68 
of scanering 40. 80 
of diffraction 51. 54. 55 
interaction volume 32, 126. 127, 141. 142, 
151. 156. 171, 193, 199 
interference 89. 106 
intermedi<lte lens 71-2, 74 
interpbn<lr spacing 43, 48, 86 
invisibility 88. 90 
criterion 90, 97. 98 
'00 
beam an<llysis 229 
guns 114. 115 
milling 114-16 
Johan spectrometer 181 
k f<lctors 204 
Kikuchi 
lines 58-62, 81. 105 
p<lnerns 151 
kinem<ltic<ll 
conditions 83, 101 
theory 54, 80--5 
K lines 36, 170 
L<.tmbert-Beer law 32 
bnthanum hexaboride, L1B6 26, 141 
bnice 51 
bending 94, 100 
fringes 107 
image 106--8 
p<lrameters 48. 62 
strain 62, 102 
LEEO 233 
lens 4 Index 247 
compound 14 
condenser 7. 67,74 
diffr<lction 71 
electromagnetic 19. 27-9. 75 
intermediate 71, 72, 74 
objective 5. 51. 67, 71-2. 74-6 
pole piece 28 
projector 5. 45. 67,72 
spherical 14 
thin 5, 28 
light microscope 4-17 
limit of detect<.tbility 199-200.205, 229 
line <.tn<.tlysis 186. 187, 189 
linesc<.tn 187 
lithium 208 
live time 178 
loc<llized electrons 22 
low energy electron diffr<lction (LEEO) 
233--4 
low loss region 207 
low volt<lge SEM 164 
magnetic 
lens 27 
materi<lls 218 
spectrometer 206 
force microscopy (MFM) 218 
magnific<.ttion 4. 5, 7, 14. 19.71-3, 124, 
220 
empty 8 
magnifying glass 4 
many-be<.tm theory 85 
mapping 186--190. 192.211-12 
mass <.tbsorption coellicient 202 
mass spectrometer 226. 229 
mass-thickness contrast 76--80. 101, 105 
MATTER software see Further Re<.tding 
237 
me<.tn free path 29, 30, 31, 32. 210 
medium voltage electron microscope 67. 
110 
microdiffraction 73 
microprobe an<llysis 36. 184-93 
Miller indices 43. 45. 49, 50 
mmlmum 
detect<lble concentration (MOe) 200 
detection limit 199.229 
zzzPsgiolePfrp248 Index 
misorientation 92 
moire fringes 94. 99 
molybdenum 21. 36 
monochromatic aberr<ltion 14. 15 
Monte-C<lrlo method 30. 33. 125. 193 
multich<lnnel an<llyser (MeA) 177. 178 
multiple scattering 29. 30 
multi-sign<l! appro<lch 223. 226 
natural contr<lst 138 
Nb16W18094 109 
near-field optic<ll microscopy (NFOM) 
218 
nickel 79 
nitrogen 208 
noise 138. 151. 189. 199 
non-conducting s<lmple 164 
nucleus 20 
numeric<ll aperture II 
objective <lperture 12. 13. 17. 71. 76-81. 
86. 106 
objective lens 5. 45. 67. 71-2. 74-6 
omega filter 212 
operating pbnes 81. 88 
optical <lxis 75 
optical microscope 135 
optimum <lperture 18 
order of dinraction 43. 103 
orient<ltion 48. 49. 52. 57. 59 
orient<ltion maps 153 
outer electrons 22 
p;.tra1!el 
EELS 206 
imaging 2.159.214 
rays 7 
spectrometer 206 
paraxial r<lys 16 
p;.trtial dislocations 97 
particles 63. 101. 102. 120 
Pauli exclusion principle 22 
peak-to-b<lckground ratio 183. 200 
PEELS 206 
phase 44. 54 
boundary 89. 92-4 
contrast 106-8 phonon scattering 31 
photogr<lphy 14. 161 
photomultiplier 129. 130 
photon 17. 35 
picture element 3-4. 133 
picture point 3 
pincushion distortion 16. 17 
pixel 3. 88. 89. 98.133. 189 
planar defects 89-94 
plasmon 
loss peaks 207. 210 
mean free path 210 
scattering 31 
plur<ll scattering 29 
point defects 219 
point group 62 
Poisson equation 29. 30. 210 
pole pieces 28.70.71. 195 
polycrysta1!ine m<lterials 41. 48. 49 
position sensitive <ltom probe (PoSAP) 
227 
precipitates 101. 102. 120 
prim<lry electron 29. 34. 76 
probe 
current 133. 137-9. 184 
diameter 132. 133. 134. 195 
minimum current 138 
minimum diameter \37 
optimum diameter 134 
projection image 2 
projection microscope 5. 45 
projector lens 5 
proportional counter 181 
pulse 177 
processor 178 
qualit<ltive analysis 169 
quantit<ltive analysis 196-205 
Raman spectroscopy 231-2 
raster 122. 124. 153. 186 
ratemeter 186 
ratio method 204 
Rayleigh criterion 10 
RBS 229-30 
real image 4 
zzzPsgiolePfrpreciproc<lliattice 51-7, 62 
point 51-3 
rods 56 
stre<lking 57 
reciprocity principle 4, 222 
reflection 
electron microscopy (REM) 216 
high energy electron diffraction 
(RHEED) 233 
refractive index II, 12, 17 
reinforcement 42 
relativity 22, 23 
relaxation 35 
replic<ltion 119-120 
residu<ll contrast 96 
resolution 8, 17,72,78, 107-9, 135, 150, 
189, 194, 196,204,222,223 
theoretic<ll 17, 18 
resolving power 8, 183 
rest mass 22 
RHEED 233 
ring pattern 47, 49 
Robinson detector 131 
rocking curve 83--4, 86--7 
Rose criterion 139 
rot<ltion 28 
Rowland circle 181, 184, 186,203 
Rutherford scattering 30, 229 
SAM 231 
s<lmpling volume 126, 127, 128, 134, 137, 
146, 171. 173, 193, 199 
s<lturation 25 
scanned probe microscopy (SPM) 216 
scanning 2, 19,29 
<lnalogue 124, 133, 161 
Auger microscope 231 
coils 38, 78, 110 
digit<ll 124, 134, 159, 162 
tr<lnsmission electron microscope 
(STEM) 38, 159, 222--4 
tunnelling microscopy (STM) 216--7, 
228 
scanning electron microscope 122--67 
<lnalogue 124, I 33, 161 
crystallogr<lphic information 149 
diffraction patterns 149 digit<ll 124, 134, 159, 162 
high performance 140 
im<lge processing 159 
im<lge storage 159 
optics 131 
perform<lnce 133 
resolution 135 
sample preparation 162 
scattering 
angle 41, 44, 57, 58 
cross-sec tion 109 
diffuse 41, 57 
elastic )0, 40, 42, 76, 78 
electron 29-33 Index 249 
inebstic 30-3, 40,57,76,78,86 
intensity 40, 54, 57, 80 
phonon 31 
plasmon 31 
Rutherford 30, 229-30 
scintillator detector 130 
screw disloc<ltions 96, 99 
second<lry effects 34-7, 226 
second<lry electron 31, 34, 37, 125 
coellicient 128 
detectors 128 
sign<ll 127 
second<lry ion m<lSS spectrometry (SIMS) 
229 
second ph<lse 89, 92--4, 101, 102, 120 
selected area 
aperture 74 
channelling p<lttern (SACI') 151 
diffr<lction (SAD) 73--4 
selection rules 36 
sensitivity 229 
seri<ll 
im<lging 2, 159,214 
spectrome ter 206 
shadow imaging 2 
shadows 2, 131 
Shockley parti<lls 97 
side-entry specimen holder 70 
sign<ll 124 
addition 148, 161 
differentiation 161 
on-line processing 160 
specimen current 159 
subtraction 148, 161 
zzzPsgiolePfrp250 Index 
silicon 73. 79. 87. 95. 105 
escape peak 180 
Si (Li) detector 175-81 
SIMS 229 
single atom imaging 217, 219. 222 
single crystal pattern 41, 47 
single sc;mering 29 
slits 181 
solid-state detector 130, 175-81 
space group 62 
specimen 80. 82 
chamber 69-71 
holder 70 
preparation 110-20 
spectrometer EELS, parOl1!el 206 
EELS. scriOlI 206 
X-ray 181-3 
sphericOlI Olberration 15, 18.72.74,140 
sphericOlllens 14 
spot analysis 185 
size 68-9, 74 
sputtering 114 
sputter cOOlting 164 
stacking fOlults 89-92 
staining 76 
stainless steel 83. 91, 93, 99. 120 
stOlndards 203 
static SIMS 229 
STEM 38. 78, 110, 159.222-4 
steradiOln 25 
stereometer 145 
stereomicroscopy 143, 145 
STM 216-217, 228 
Stokes shift 232 
strain 97. 100 
streaking 56, 58 
structure 
fOlctor 44-5, 54 
image 107-8 
sum peOlk 180 
superconduc tor 9 
support 
films 119 
grids 112 
surface 
Olnalysis 231 
microscopy 216-19 take-off Olngle 181, 203 
television 3. 19 
TEM/STEM 78 
thermionic emission 138 
thermionic triode electron gun 24-6, 122 
thickness 205. 210 
fringes 84-6. 92 
thin lens 28 
equOltion 5 
thinning 111-16 
thin specimens 204-5 
till 70--1, 145 
time-of-Ilight mOlSS spectrometer 226 
tissue seetions 78, 118 
top/bottom effect 90 
topogrOlphy 141 
transmission 
electron microscope 66-121 
imOlging 5 
triode gun 24. 25 
two-beOlm conditions 80. 85. 88 
tungsten 26 
tunnelling 26. 216 
current 216 
ultramicrotomy 118 
ultra-thin window 177, 179 
uncoOlted samples 166 
underfocus 68 
unit cel! 43 
UPS 23 I 
vacancies 220. 221 
valence electron excitOltion 31 
vlewmg screen 14, 66. 72 
virtuOlI 
imOlge 4 
standOlrds 203 
voids 103, 104 
waveform monitor 124 
wavelength 11-3. 17.23, 42. 43. 46, 172, 
I7J 
dispersive anOllysis 181-3 
dispersive spectrometer (WDS) 175, 
182 
weak beOlm technique 102-5 
zzzPsgiolePfrpWehnelt 24 
white radi<ltion 170 
width of im<lge 89. 104. 105-6 
window 177 
energy 209 
windowless detector 177 
work function 26 
working dist<lnce 130. 131. 132. 137 
XPS 231 
X-r<ly 31. 35. 48. 62.125.126.170 
Bremsstr<lhlung 36. 170 
characteristic 35. 36 
detector 175-81 
emission 36 Index 251 
energies and w<lvelengths (t<lble) 172-3 
mapping 186--90. 211 
photoelectron spectroscopy 231 
spectrometer 181-3 
l<lke-ofr <lngle 203 
yield 
sccond<lry electrons 34. 128 
X-r<lys 37 
ZAF corrections 201-3 
Z-contr<lst 219. 224 
zero loss peak 207. 209 
zone <lxis 62 